---
layout: full_article
title: "Enhancing Repurchase Intention at Warung Kopi Tepi Sungai Depok: The Role of Customer Experience"
author: "Maidar Simanihuruk, Yuviani Kusumawardhani, Lovita Susan Audilla"
categories: eot
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/eot/full-82285 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/eot/id-82285"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/eot/full-82285"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font3">E-Journal of Tourism Vol.9. No.1. (2022): 58-66</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Enhancing Repurchase Intention at Warung Kopi Tepi Sungai Depok: The Role of Customer Experience</span></h1>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>Maidar Simanihuruk*, Yuviani Kusumawardhani, Lovita Susan Audilla</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Sekolah Tinggi Pariwisata Bogor, Indonesia</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">*Corresponding Author: </span><a href="mailto:maidar_manihuruk@stpbogor.ac.id"><span class="font3">maidar_manihuruk@stpbogor.ac.id</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">DOI: </span><a href="https://doi.org/10.24922/eot.v9i1.82285"><span class="font2">https://doi.org/10.24922/eot.v9i1.82285</span></a></p>
<div>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Article Info</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Submitted:</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">January 12<sup>th</sup> 2022</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Accepted:</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">March 7<sup>th</sup> 2022</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Published:</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">March 31<sup>th</sup> 2022</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstract</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Experience is the most critical stage in earning customers' hearts. Any marketing strategy must include the creation of a positive customer experience. The higher the impact on customer pleasure and the willingness to return and acquire the products sold, the better the customer experience. Warung Kopi Tepi Sungai Depok has various advantages despite its less-than-ideal location. It provides guests with comfort and a peaceful rural setting. The purpose of this research is to determine how customer experience influences repurchase intent at Warung Kopi Tepi Sungai Depok. In order to collect more comprehensive, valid, accurate, and objective data, a quantitative method was used in the study. A total of 101 customers who visited the café were included in the sample. Both factor and regression analysis was employed in the data analysis. Customer experience had a substantial impact on repurchase intention (t = 8.356 &gt;&nbsp;t table with a significance of 0.000 (ρ &lt;&nbsp;0.05). With its interior design and unique style, the customer experience at Warung Kopi Tepi Sungai Depok has a dominant influence on influencing repurchase intention, and consumers are interested in returning to this place. The author makes a suggestion, advising that more attention be paid to and development of the website be done in order to establish direct contacts with clients. This cafe has to improve its services, offer new menu items, and keep its facilities clean. Then Warung Kopi Tepi Sungai Depok will be the top option of the customers.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Keywords</span><span class="font3">: Repurchase Intention; Customer Experience; Revisit Intention.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">INTRODUCTION</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>Background</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">In reaching the point of consumer satisfaction to generate consumer repurchase intention, a cafe business has to take into account how much the determination of the prices, menu to be offered, and the quality of the service that will be provided</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">by the cafe. But for now, focusing attention on those aspects is taken for granted. Therefore, now is the time for cafes to be aggressive in carrying out promotions, as well as provide unique benefits and experiences for consumers so that consumers are very memorable and can always remember it. The services provided must be able to evoke sensations and experiences that will</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">generate repurchase interest in a company. In creating a customer experience, the company will always be emotionally involved in much activity so that consumers will get a unique, memorable, and unforgettable experience on the spot and will create a sense of desire to revisit (Hasan, 2013; Sayuti &amp;&nbsp;Dewi, 2015).</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The purpose of a business is to make consumers feel satisfied. The creation of satisfaction felt by consumers in the cafe business will provide several advantages for a company, including the establishment of a good relationship between the company and the consumer itself to be more harmonious, provide a good basis for repurchasing and create consumer loyalty to the company, and form word of mouth recommendations. The higher of the customer experience will obviously affect consumer satisfaction and will directly affect the consumer's desire to come back and buy the products sold. The company will gain multiple benefits, through the dissemination of positive information from consumers to consumers (Tjiptono, 2000; Safitri, 2017). Converse, if there is no satisfaction obtained by consumers, it will result in consumers switching to other companies. The lack of satisfaction obtained by consumers will result in consumers being reluctant to make repeat purchases at a particular company or brand.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">To accomplish customer satisfaction, it is necessary to provide an interesting experience. If consumers feel uncomfortable and disappointed then what happens is that consumers will complain and criticize the cafe and provide a bad experience for consumers. With the experience provided in the form of the best service and providing a different atmosphere from existing cafes, consumers will feel happy, comfortable and make the cafe the main choice to revisit. With a not-so-strategic location, Warung Kopi Tepi Sungai Cafe, Depok has several advantages. It has comfort and a quiet rural atmosphere that </span><a href="http://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/eot"><span class="font3">http://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/eot &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span></a><span class="font3">59</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">makes customers happy. Researchers are interested in knowing the relationship between customers and repurchase intention at Warung Kopi Tepi Sungai Cafe, Depok.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>Research Objectives</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">This current study was intended to analyze the effect of the dimension of customer experience (sense, feel, think, act, and relate) on the repurchase intention (transactional interest, referential interest, preferential interest, and explorative interest) of the customers visiting the Warung Kopi Tepi Sungai Café, Depok.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">LITERATURE REVIEW</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>Customer Experience</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Customer experience is a personal experience that is obtained due to certain stimuli, for example, those given by marketers before and after the purchase of goods and services (Upayani, Susrusa, &amp;&nbsp;Anggreni, 2019). Customer experience refers to the experience felt by customers of a brand, product, or service to increase the value of a sale.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The experience felt by customers of a brand, product, or service to increases the value of a sale and evoke emotions and feelings that have an impact on marketing, especially the sale of products and services such as café (Schmitt, 2003; Monica &amp;&nbsp;Widaningsih, 2020). The five dimensions of Customer Experience. These five dimensions are: sense, feel, think, act, and relate. (1) Sense, associated with style, verbal and visual that can create an impression that can be remembered by customers. An approach has a goal to feel and create experiences related to feelings through seeing by touching, feeling, and smelling in other words related to the five senses which include style, theme and color; (2) Feel, it relates to the mood and emotions of a person's soul. This is not just about picturesque, but the mood and emotions of the</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">soul that can evoke happiness or even sadness. The intended feel is an emotional feeling that comes from the heart in a positive way and the feeling of joy that occurs. The sensing element can also affect mood and positive feelings or emotions; (3) Think, creative thoughts that arise in the minds of consumers of a brand company. Customers are invited to engage in creative thinking.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The principle of thought consists of 3: surprise, intrigue, and provocation; (4) Act, the actual behavior and lifestyle of a person. It has to do with how to get people to do things and express their lifestyle. The Marketing Act strategy is designed to create a customer experience that relates to body movements or in other words the movements and interactions that arise. Act Experience includes flesh that is related to the body, not only the sensation and perception of the outside world, the action of the machine also works fully which can cause interaction, because it is closely related to physical behavior on lifestyle and from the interacting parties; (5) Relate, attempts to connect one person to another, to a brand or company, and to culture. This relates to a person's culture and reference group that can create identity. The company must be able to create an identity (generation, nationality, and ethnicity) for its customers with the products or services offered. Companies can use culture in advertising and web design that can identify certain customer groups.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>Repurchase Intention</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Consumer purchase intention is a consumer behavior where consumers have a desire to buy or choose a product, based on experience in choosing, using and consuming, or even wanting a product. The factors that influence buying interest are related to feelings and emotions, if someone feels happy and satisfied in buying goods or services then it will strengthen buying interest, and dissatisfaction will </span><a href="http://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/eot"><span class="font3">http://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/eot &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span></a><span class="font3">60</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">usually eliminate that interest (Kotler &amp;&nbsp;Keller, 2012; Satria, 2017). The AIDA model is a stage model of consumer buying interest before making a purchase: attention, interest, desire, and action (Kotler &amp;&nbsp;Keller, 2012; Priansa, 2017).</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">(1) Attention, this stage is the initial stage that appears in assessing a product or service in accordance with the needs of prospective customers, besides that products and services are also studied by these prospective customers; (2) Interest, prospective customers begin to be interested in a product and are interested in buying the products or services that have been offered, because they have received the information and services; (3) Desire, prospective customers at this stage begin to think and discuss the products and services offered. They have the desire, and the desire to buy that is starting to emerge. Prospective customers have begun to be interested in the product or service, and this stage is marked by strong interest from potential customers to buy and try the product or service offered; (4) Action, this stage, the prospective customer already has stability accompanied by a sense of confidence to buy and also use the product or service that has been offered.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Repurchase intention, the individual's perception about buying again a determined service from the same company, taking into account his or her current situation and likely circumstances (Hellier, Geursen, Carr, &amp;&nbsp;Rickard, 2003). According to (Ferdinand 2002) repurchase intention is a consumer commitment that is formed after the consumer makes a purchase of a product or service, the consumer's positive impression of a brand, and consumers are satisfied with the purchase. Repurchase intention arises after the customer gets an expected and desired satisfaction with a service. Repurchase intention that occurs continuously can mean that the customer has become a very loyal customer for a product or service (Priansa, </span><span class="font3">e-ISSN 2407-392X. p-ISSN 2541-0857</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">2017; Monica &amp;&nbsp;Widaningsih, 2020). Repurchase intention is identified through indicators: transactional interest, referential interest, preferential interest, exploratory interest (Ferdinand 2002; Ailudin &amp;&nbsp;Sari 2019). Transactional Interest, a person's tendency to buy a product; Referential Interest, the tendency of a person to refer products to others; Preferential Interest, an interest that describes the behavior of someone who has a primary preference for the product and it can only be changed if something happens to the preferred product; Explorative Interest, the behavior of someone who is always looking for information about the product of interest and looking for information to support the positive properties of the product.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">RESEARCH METHODS</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>Research Location and Time</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">This research was conducted at Warung Kopi Tepi Sungai Café, Depok for five months, from March 2021 to July 2021. The research began from the process of data collection until completion and focuses on customer experience affect repurchase intention at Warung Kopi Tepi Sungai Café, Depok. With a not-so-strate-gic location, it has several advantages, comfort and a quiet rural atmosphere that makes customers happy. This research is expected to help the object to know whether their customer experience affect repurchase intention at Warung Kopi Tepi Sungai Cafe, Depok.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>Data Collecting</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">The type of research data consisted of primary data and secondary data. Both the qualitative and quantitative data were used in the current research. The data were obtained from both the primary and secondary data sources. The data were collected through the library research and field research (observation, direct </span><a href="http://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/eot"><span class="font3">http://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/eot &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span></a><span class="font3">61</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">interview, questionnaire, and documentation). Data collection in this research was conducted through observations, interviews, documentation, and library studies.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>Research Population and Samples</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">The research sampling is based on the requirements of the regression analysis in which the requirements for the number of samples are 101. The population in this study included all the customers who visited the Warung Kopi Tepi Sungai Depok. The sample consists of 101 respondents utilizing non-probability sampling of purposive sampling technique that allows the researcher to not giving equal opportunities to all elements of the population to be selected as a respondent. Of these, 101 responses were deemed useful and used in the data analysis with a valid response rate of 90 percent.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>Variables and Data Analysis</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">The completed and structured close-ended questionnaires were coded and keyed in the Statistical Package for Social Sciences (SPSS) computer program version 23 and descriptive analysis such as means, standard deviation, and correlation analysis was performed. Next, further investigation using hierarchical simple regression analysis was executed to assess the relationship between one independent variable (customer experience) and the dependent variable (repurchase intention), controlling the effect of a different of independent variable on the dependent variable which thereafter could furnish empirical findings in supporting the outlined research objectives.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">This is an associative research approach, which means it is used to determine the effect of independent variables on the dependent variable. At Warung Kopi Tepi Sungai, Depok, a study was done to investigate the impact of customer experience on repurchase intention.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">RESULT AND DISCUSSION</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>Demographic Characteristics of Respondents</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">In table 1 depicts the respondents’ demographic characteristics of respondents. Male respondents made up 57.4 percent of the sample while females made up 42.6 percent. This shows that males are more consumptive in buying products at Warung Kopi Tepi Sungai Depok. The respondents are dominant aged 20 – 25 years (54.5 percent) with education of 50.5 percent are high school graduates and this explains that consumers who visit Warung Kopi Tepi Sungai Depok are of productive age. Most of the consumers are from Depok city area (63.4 percent). The characteristics of the occupation 39.6 percent are students, 20.8 percent are other (can be family). From this data, consumers who buy products are dominated by students and families. Income of respondent is known that 39.6 percent has an income of &lt;&nbsp;IDR 1,000,000, 32.7 percent of IDR 3,000,000 – IDR 5,000,000, and 17.8 percent of IDR 1,000,000 – IDR 5,000,000. This shows that consumers who buy products at Warung Kopi Tepi Sungai Depok from a lower-middle economy.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">They are usually sensitive to prices and comparisons with prices of other similar products, so that in determining the price of Warung Kopi tepi Sungai Depok must be careful and with an in-depth study, with the loyalty of consumers who buy products at this café will be maintained. The characteristics of frequently visit, it is known that second – fourth time (41.6 percent), and more than sixth time 24.8 percent. It shows that consumers who come to the Warung Kopi Tepi Sungai Depok are loyal consumers. To keep loyal consumers, Warung Kopi Tepi Sungai can provide special prices and always innovate so as not to be abandoned by loyal visitors. Considerations for choosing this place, the data obtained are 30.7 percent comfortable place and 24.8 percent services provided. This shows that consumers choose the Warung Kopi Sungai Depok because of the convenience of the place and service. From the characteristics of consumer motivation, it is known that 43.6 percent is due to affordable prices and a comfortable cafe atmosphere. This shows that many consumers feel very comfortable buying products at affordable prices.</span></p>
<div>
<table border="1">
<tr><td colspan="6" style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Table 1</span><span class="font4">. The Distribution of Demographic Characteristics</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">A. Gender</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">F</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">%</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">B. Age</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">F</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">%</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Male</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">58</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">57.4</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">14 - 19</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">20</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">19.8</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">Female</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">43</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">42.6</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">20 – 25</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">55</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">54.5</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">26 – 34</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">23</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">22.8</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">35 - 43</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">3</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">3.0</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">C. City of Residence</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">F</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">%</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">D. Education</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">F</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">%</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Bogor</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">20</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">19.8</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Middle School</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">2</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">2.0</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">Jakarta</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">6</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">5.9</span></p></td><td rowspan="2" style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">High School Diploma Bachelor Degree</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">51</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">50.5</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">Bandung Depok</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">4</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">64</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">4.0</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">63.4</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">32</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">15</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">31.7</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">14.9</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Lain-lain</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">7</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">6.9</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Post Graduate</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">1</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">1.0</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">E. Occupation</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">F</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">%</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">F. Income of Respondent</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">F</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">%</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Student</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">40</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">39.6</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">&lt; 1,000,000</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">40</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">39.6</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">Private Employee</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">28</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">27.7</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">1,000,000 – 3,000,000</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">18</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">17.8</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">Government Employee</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">2</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">2.0</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">3,000,000 – 5,000,000</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">33</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">32.7</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">Entrepreneur</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">10</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">9.9</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">&gt; 5,000,000</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">10</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">9.9</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">The other jobs</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">21</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">20.8</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td></tr>
<tr><td rowspan="2" style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">G. Frequently Visit</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">F</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">%</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">H. Consideration for</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">F</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">%</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Choosing</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td></tr>
</table>
</div><br clear="all">
<div>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">First time</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">6</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">5.9</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">Menu Diversity</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">5</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">5.0</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Second - Fourth time</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">42</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">41.6</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Service</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">25</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">24.8</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">Fifth – Sixth time</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">28</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">27.7</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">Location</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">17</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">16.8</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">More than sixth time</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">25</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">24.8</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">Discount/Promotional Price</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">12</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">11.9</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">Convenience Place</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">31</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">30.7</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">The other option</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">11</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">10.9</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">I. Source Information</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">F</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">%</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">J. Motivation</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">F</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">%</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Family member/Spouse</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">9</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">8.9</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Affordable prices</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">44</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">43.6</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Friends Relatives</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">63</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">62.4</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Cozy Place</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">44</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">43.6</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">Social Media/Advertis-</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">22</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">21.8</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">Interior Unique, distinctive &amp;</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">8</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">7.9</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">ing/Brochure</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">interesting</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">The other source</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">7</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">6.9</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">The other motivation</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">5</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">5.0</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font4">Source: The Processed Primary Data (2021)</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<h2><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>Descriptive Statistics</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">The descriptive statistic for respondent response of the customer experience</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">affect repurchase intention is presented in Table 2.</span></p>
<div>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Table 2</span><span class="font4">. Respondent Response of Customer Experience Affect Repurchase Intention</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Variable: Customer Experience</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Labels</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Means</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">SD</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Attractive and impressive interior and outdoor st</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">CES1</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">4.16</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">.596</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">The atmosphere is very friendly with nature and comfortable</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">CES2</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">4.32</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">.599</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">Old Cafe design and unique style atmosphere</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">CES3</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">4.38</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">.676</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">Staffs are friendly</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">CEF1</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">4.10</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">.686</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">Quality of food and drinks</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">CEF2</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">3.97</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">.608</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">Convenient place</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">CEF3</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">4.16</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">.628</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">Café Instagram able</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">CET1</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">3.37</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">.845</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">Provide promotions for members</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">CET2</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">3.45</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">.932</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">Serving a trending menu</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">CET3</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">3.63</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">.797</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">Affordable Prices</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">CEA1</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">4.22</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">.657</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">Direct interaction with customer</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">CEA2</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">3.94</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">.719</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">Memorable Experience</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">CEA3</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">3.92</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">.659</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">Has update information through social media</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">CER1</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">3.47</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">.831</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">Have website to establish a direct relationship with customers</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">CER2</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">3.18</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">.942</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">Special treatment for regular customers</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">CER3</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">4.12</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">.671</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Variable: Repurchase Intention</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Labels</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Means</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">SD</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Interest Visiting</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">RI1</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">4.0</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">.678</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">Prefer Café</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">RI2</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">3.47</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">.855</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">Recommend to relatives and close friends</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">RI3</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">3.87</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">.716</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">Recommend food, drink, and service</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">RI4</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">3.76</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">.838</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">Interested in Menu and Service</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">RI5</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">3.77</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">.705</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">First Choice</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">RI6</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">3.18</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">1.1</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">Purchase Product Offering</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">RI7</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">3.53</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">.657</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">Looking for update information</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">RI8</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">3.45</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">.806</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
</div><br clear="all">
<p><span class="font4">The multi-item statements are designed for a five-point Likert scale ranging from 1 (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree). As seen in table 2 above, the highest mean value is on CES3 indicator statement which is at an average of 4.38 which means that respondents agree that Warung Kopi Tepi Sungai Depok has an interior with old design and unique style atmosphere. Whereas the lowest mean value is on the statement of customer experience statement CER2 which is at an average of 3.18, which means that neutral respondents state that Warung Kopi Tepi Sungai Depok has not provided website facilities to establish direct relationships with customers.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The highest mean value is on Repurchase Intention RI1 indicator statement which is on average 4.0 which means respondents almost all agree that consumers are interested revisit Warung Kopi Tepi Sungai Depok. While the lowest mean value is on the Repurchase Intention RI6 indicator statement which is at an average of 3.18 which means that neutral respondents stated that Warung Kopi Tepi Sungai Depok is not the main choice.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The standard deviation value has a value close to 1 (whole number) which is between 0.596 to 0.942, and 0.657 to 1.1 which means that the diversity of respondents gives answers large enough and is not homogeneous in providing answers to tourist attraction, which means that all answers given by respondents vary.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark24"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark25"></a>Reliability Analysis</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Reliability refers to a sense that the instrument used in research to obtain the desired information can be trusted (reliably) as a data collection tool and able to reveal actual information in the field. The reliability test method used is the Cronbach's Alpha method, construct is considered reliable if the Alpha coefficient is&gt; 0.70 (Sugiarto, Hendratono and Djoko 2015). The reading of Cronbach’s α for all the</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">variables as described in Table 3 exceeds the criterion of 0.70, indicating the survey instrument is reliable to measure all constructs consistently and is free from random error.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Tabel 3. </span><span class="font4">Reliability Analysis</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Variable &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Number &nbsp;Cronbach’s</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">of Items &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Alpha</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Costumer Expe- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;15 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;.855</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">rience</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Repurchase In- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;8 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;.870</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">tention</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Source: The Processed Primary Data (2021)</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark26"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark27"></a>Results of the Regression Analysis</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Simple Correlation Analysis is used to determine the relationship between one independent variable to the dependent variable. Determination analysis in simple regression is used to determine the percentage contribution of the influence of the independent variable on the dependent variable (Sugiyono 2016).</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Tabel 4. </span><span class="font4">Customer Experience Affect Repurchase Intention</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">R &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;R &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Ad- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Std.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Square justed &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Error</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">R &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;of the</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Square &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Esti</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">mate</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">.643 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;.414 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;.408 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;3.594</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Source: The Processed Primary Data (2021)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">As seen in table 4, correlation among customer experience on repurchase intention is seen. The R number is 0.643, this shows that there is a strong relationship between customer experience on repurchase intention. The determination coefficient is obtained by R2 (R Square) by 0.414. This shows that the percentage contribution of the influence of customer experience on repurchase intention by 41.4% while 58.6% is influenced by other variables not examined.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">As indicated in table 5, the results of</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">linear regression hypotheses testing, T test to determine the effect of customer experience (independent) on the fixed variable (dependent).</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Table 5</span><span class="font4">. Hypothesis Testing Results</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Hy- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Statement &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Score &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Remarks</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">pothe-sis</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">H</span><span class="font0">1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font2">Customer T = 8.356 &nbsp;&nbsp;H</span><span class="font0">1 </span><span class="font2">accept</span></p>
<p><span class="font2"><sup>Experience</sup> Sig. = .000 &nbsp;&nbsp;H</span><span class="font0">0 </span><span class="font2">reject</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Repurchase Intention</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Source: The Processed Primary Data (2021)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">In Table 5, the results of the t-test analysis related to costumer experience on repurchase intention at Warung Kopi Tepi Sungai Depok, the t </span><span class="font1">count </span><span class="font4">&gt;&nbsp;t </span><span class="font1">table </span><span class="font4">was obtained; 8.356 &gt;&nbsp;1.660 with a significance of 0.000 (ρ &lt;&nbsp;0.05). The positive t value indicates that costumer experience has a direct relationship with repurchase intention. So, it can be concluded that the costumer experience has a significant influence on repurchase intention.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark28"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark29"></a>CONCLUSION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Based on the results of the study, the conclusions the dimension of customer experience are: sense, feel, think, act, and relate positively and significantly contributed to repurchase intention: transactional interest, referential interest, preferential interest, exploratory interest at Warung Kopi Tepi Sungai Depok. One of the indicators Customer Experience variables has the lowest value, an indicator of the use of the website Warung Kopi Tepi Sungai Depok. A website needs to be created so that consumers can use the website to make reservations easily, buy products through the website or find out all the latest information related to Warung Kopi Tepi Sungai Depok to establish direct relationships with customers. While the lowest mean value is on the Repurchase Intention </span><a href="http://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/eot"><span class="font3">http://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/eot &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span></a><span class="font3">65</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">indicator statement stated that Warung Kopi Tepi Sungai Depok is not the main choice. To achieve its, Warung Kopi Sungai Tepi Depok needs to be improving its services, add new menus, and maintain the cleanliness of the Warung Kopi Sungai Tepi Depok. Then, Warung Kopi Tepi Sungai Depok will become the customer's first choice.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark30"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark31"></a>ACKNOWLEDGMENTS</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">The author would like to thank the Bogor School of Tourism (STP Bogor) who has given assistance in the form of finance.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark32"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark33"></a>REFERENCES</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Ailudin, M., &amp;&nbsp;Sari, D. (2019). Pengaruh Customer Experience Terhadap Minat Beli Ulang (Studi pada Pelanggan One Eighty &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Coffee &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bandung).</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">eProceedings of Management. VI</span><span class="font4">, pp.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">1050-1057. Bandung: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Telkom</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Ferdinand, A. (2002). </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Pengembangan Minat Belli Merek Ekstensi. </span><span class="font4">Semarang: Badan Penerbit Universitas Diponegoro.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Hasan, A. (2013). </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Marketing dan Kasus-Kasus Pilihan.</span><span class="font4"> Yogyakarta: Center For Academic Publishing Service (CAPS) .</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Hellier, P. K., Geursen, G. M., Carr, R. A., &amp;&nbsp;Rickard, J. A. (2003, December). Customer Repurchase Intention: A General Structural Equation Model. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">European Journal of Marketing</span><span class="font4">, 17621800.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">doi:10.1108/03090560310495456</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Kotler, P., &nbsp;&amp;&nbsp;Keller, K. L. (2012).</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Marketing Management</span><span class="font4"> (14 ed.). (K. Bloom, &amp;&nbsp;E. Scarpa, Eds.) New Jersey, United States of America: Prentice Hall: Pearson.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Monica, T., &amp;&nbsp;Widaningsih, S. (2020).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">e-ISSN 2407-392X. p-ISSN 2541-0857</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Pengaruh Customer Experience Terhadap Minat Beli Ulang (Studi Kasus pada Taman Kardus Bandung). </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">eProceedings of Applied Science. Vol VI No 1</span><span class="font4">, pp. 30 - 35. Bandung: Telkom University. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Retrieved &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;from</span></p>
<p><a href="https://openlibrarypublications.telkom"><span class="font4">https://openlibrarypublications.telkom</span></a><span class="font4"> university.ac.id/index.php/appliedscie nce/article/view/11505</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Priansa, D. J. (2017). </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Perilaku Konsumen dalam &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Persaingan &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bisnis</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Kontemporer.</span><span class="font4"> Bandung: Alfabeta.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Safitri, K. (2017). Analisis Pengaruh Customer Experience Dan Kepuasan Konsumen Terhadap Minat Beli Ulang di Storia Cafe MMXVI. &nbsp;</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Jurnal</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Terapan Manajemen dan &nbsp;Bisnis,</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">III</span><span class="font4">(1), 66-75.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Satria, A. A. (2017). Pengaruh Harga, Promosi, dan Kualitas Produk Terhadap Minat Beli Konsumen Pada Perusahaan. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">PERFORMA: &nbsp;Jurnal</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Manajemen dan Start-Up Bisnis, II</span><span class="font4">(1), 45-53.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Sayuti, M. H., &amp;&nbsp;Dewi, C. K. (2015). Analisis &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Pengaruh &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Customer</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Experience &nbsp;Terhadap &nbsp;Minat Beli</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Ulang Konsumen Pada Kafe Nom Nom Eatery Bandung. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">eProceedings of Management</span><span class="font4">, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">II</span><span class="font4">, pp. 1932-1940.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Schmitt, B. (2003). </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Customer Experience Management. A Revolutionary Approach to Connecting with Your Customer.</span><span class="font4"> New York: John Wiley &amp;&nbsp;Sons.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Sugiarto, P., Hendratono, T., &amp;&nbsp;Djoko, S. (2015). </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Metodologi Penelitian Hospitality &amp;&nbsp;Pariwisata.</span><span class="font4"> Tangerang: Matana Publishing.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Sugiyono, P. D. (2016). </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Metode Penelitian Manajemen (Pendekatan Kuantitatif, Kualitatif, Kombinasi (Mixed Methods), Penelitian Tindakan (Action Research, dan Penelitian Evaluasi).</span><span class="font4"> Bandung: Alfabeta Cv.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Tjiptono, F. (2000). </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Prinsip-Prinsip Total </span><a href="http://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/eot"><span class="font3">http://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/eot &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span></a><span class="font3">66</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Quality Service (TQS).</span><span class="font4"> Yogyakarta: Andi Offset.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Upayani, N. A., Susrusa, K. B., &nbsp;&amp;</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Anggreni, I. A. (2019). Pengaruh Unsur-Unsur Costomer Experience Terhadap Minat Pembelian Kembali (Studi Kasus pada Konsumen Anomali Coffee Ubud). </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">E-Jurnal Agibisnis dan Agrowisata, VIII</span><span class="font4">(1), 3948.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">e-ISSN 2407-392X. p-ISSN 2541-0857</span></p>