---
layout: full_article
title: "The Translation of Taboo Words in the Deadpool 2 Movie Subtitle"
author: "I Wayan Gede Candra Wibawa, I Made Netra, I Made Rajeg"
categories: linguistika
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/full-91851 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/id-91851"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/full-91851"  
comments: true
---

<p><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/linguistika/"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/linguistika/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">DOI: </span><a href="https://doi.org/10.24843/ling.2022.v29.i02.p09"><span class="font2">https://doi.org/10.24843/ling.2022.v29.i02.p09</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">LINGUISTIKA, SEPTEMBER 2022</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">p-ISSN: 0854-9613 e-ISSN: 2656-6419</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 29 No.2</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>The Translation of Taboo Words in the Deadpool 2 Movie Subtitle</span></h1>
<p><span class="font4">I Wayan Gede Candra Wibawa<sup>1</sup>, I Made Netra<sup>2</sup>, I Made Rajeg<sup>3</sup></span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Udayana University, Denpasar, Bali</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Correspondence email: </span><a href="mailto:candrawibawa42@mail.com"><span class="font4">candrawibawa42@mail.com</span></a><span class="font4">, </span><a href="mailto:imadenetra@unud.ac.id"><span class="font4">imadenetra@unud.ac.id</span></a><span class="font4">,</span><a href="mailto:made_rajeg@unud.ac.id"><span class="font4"> </span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">made_rajeg@unud.ac.id</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstract--</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">This study is entitled “The Translation of Taboo Words in the Deadpool 2 Movie Subtitle”. This study aimed at describing the types of taboo words found in the Deadpool 2 movie and analyzing the translation procedures applied in translating the taboo words from English subtitle text into Indonesian. The data sources of this study were the Deadpool 2 movie subtitle, both its English and Indonesian versions. The descriptive qualitative method was applied in analyzing the data. The taboo words were analyzed using Jay’s theory about the types of taboo words. Meanwhile, the theory proposed by Vinay and Dalbernet was used to describe the translation procedure in translating taboo words into Indonesian. The results of the study show that not all types of taboo words and translation procedures were found. Through the analysis of taboo words obscenity was the most type of taboo word shown in the movie and there were only two translation procedures applied in translating the taboo words.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Keywords </span><span class="font4">: </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">taboo words, translation, translation procedure</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstrak--</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Skripsi ini berjudul “Terjemahan Kata Tabu dalam Subtitel Film Deadpool 2”. Skripsi ini bertujuan untuk mendeskripsikan tipe kata tabu yang ditemukan di film Deadpool 2 dan menganaisis prosedur penerjemahan yang digunakan dalam menerjemahkan kata tabu yang berasal dari subtitel bahasa Inggris yang diterjemahkan ke bahasa Indonesia. Sumber data yang digunakan adalah film Deadpool 2 beserta subtitel versi bahasa Inggris dan bahasa Indonesianya. Metode deskripsi qualitatif digunakan dalam menganalisis data yang diperoleh. Kata tabu dianalisis menggunakan teori yang dikemukakan oleh Timothy Jay, sedangkan teori yang dikemukakan oleh Vinay dan Dalbelnet digunakan untuk menganalisis prosedur penerjemahan yang digunakan dalam menerjemahkan kata tabu yang telah diterjemahkan ke dalam bahasa Indonesia. Hasil dari skripsi ini memperlihatkan tidak semua tipe kata tabu dapat ditemukan. Melalui analisa kata tabu, obscenity adalah tipe dari kata tabu yang paling banyak ditemukan dalam film Deadpool 2. Dalam analisis prosedur penerjemahan, hanya ada dua prosedur penerjemahan yang digunakan dalam penerjemahkan kata tabu dari bahasa Inggris ke dalam bahasa Indnesia. Tidak semua kata tabu yang ada dalam subtitel bahasa Inggris yang diterjemahkan ke bahasa Indonesia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Kata Kunci </span><span class="font4">: </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">kata tabu, penerjemahan, prosedur penerjemahan</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 29 No.2</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h1><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Introduction</span></h1></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Language is a system which takes an important aspect in human life as a means of communication. It conveys the idea, emotions, opinions, and intentions of people. Language can be in the form of oral communication or may be in written form. According to Ethnologue, there were 6909 distinct languages spread around the world in 2009 (Anderson, 2010). People in one language will have a struggle to understand another language. Therefore, the term translation is important.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The translation is a part of applied linguistics. Applied linguistics the study of language and linguistics concerning practical problems, such as lexicography, translation, speech pathology, etc (Richards et al. 1992: 19). The translation is a process of transferring the meaning of words in the form of texts from one language into another language. In order to make a good translation, translators need to have a good understanding of more than one languages. A translator should have a wide variety of lexicons or vocabularies and know the types of words, such as taboo words.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Taboo is a cultural custom that should be avoided to do, use or talk about a particular thing as people find it offensive and embarrassing. A Taboo word refers to a word that seems inappropriate in a certain context. According to (Fairman, 2009), every society has its particular taboo act and taboo words. Any activities related to taboo acts should be avoided, and then any words that are related to taboo words should not be uttered. Due to its associated with harsh meaning, taboo words are always considered inappropriate words to utter in a daily conversation. For Indonesian people, taboo words are the same as a reproach. However, the use of the taboo words still can be found in media such as, in the movie.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">American movies, especially the R rated ones, usually contain taboo words. R rated movie means restricted which children less than 17 years old without parents or adult guardians are not allowed to watch. A movie such as Deadpool 2 is</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">an R rated movie, contains inappropriate language. This movie seems interesting to be analyzed. It is a famous movie directed by David Leitch. This movie carries some inappropriate languages that were uttered by the actor and actress inside the movie. It made the Deadpool 2 movie a good object in analyzing taboo words.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">There were some previous studies that analyzed translation and also taboo words including, the study entitled The Indonesian Translation of Taboo Words in the Hangover 1&amp;2 Movies (Dian, 2016). It was analyzed the types and the translation types of taboo words in the movie. Also the other study entitled Procedure of Translating Dialogues in Carrol's Alice's Adventure in Wonderland from English into Indonesian (Asriana, 2019). This study analized the translation procedure used by the translator. It focused on the dialogue in Alice's Adventure in Wonderland novel. Through the previous analyses, this study was expected to make further analysis about taboo word and translation procedure.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">This analysis was focused on the taboo words and their translations into Indonesian. The taboo words in all word classes such as noun, verb, adjective, etc. were classified according to Jay’s theory about the types of taboo words. The translation of taboo words from English into Indonesian was described according to the theory of translation procedure proposed by Vinay and Dalbernet. All data in this analysis were collected from a movie subtitle text.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method And Theory</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">In this thesis, the primary data were taken from the Deadpool 2 movie’s subtitles, the English version and the Indonesian version. The movie was released on May 18, 2018, by 21st Century Fox. This movie was chosen because it contains strong languages. The Indonesian subtitle of this movie was written by Dimas Daffa Yaniardi. Dimas or also known as EveryAgent is an Indonesian translator. Starting his career as a translator in 2014 by translating movies and now he starts to translate TV series and games. He is a member of IDFL<sup>TM</sup> SubCrews, one of the biggest</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 29 No.2</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">subtitle communities in Indonesia (Wirastama, 2018).</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Documentation and observation methods were applied during the collection of the data and it was assisted with the note-taking technique. The techniques used in collecting data were observation and documentation. The data collected were in the form of words. The collected data were written in two notes. The first note included the data taken from the English subtitle. The second note included the data taken from the Indonesian subtitle that was based on the first note.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The descriptive qualitative method was used in analyzing data (Stephanie, 2016). The data of this thesis was analyzed using qualitative analysis based on the theories used. First of all the taboo words need to be classified into their word class. Then the taboo words should be classified and analyzed by the types of taboo words propose by Jay (1992). (Jay, 1992) stated there are 10 types of taboo words including, cursing, profanity, blasphemy, taboo, obscenity, slang, epithet, insult and slur, vulgarity and scatology. After that, the Indonesian translations of the taboo words need to be analyzed on what translation procedure is used to translate the taboo words based on Vinay and Dalbernet’s theory. The theory is divided into two strategies namely, direct and oblique translation. Direct translation consists of three procedures including, borrowing, literal translation and calque. In the other hand, the oblique translation consists of four procedures. They are transposition, modulation, equivalence and adaptation (Hatim &amp;&nbsp;Munday, 2004).</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">In the presenting data, the descriptive method was used in presenting the analysis in this study. The data and analysis were described in the informal form. The data from the first problems of discussion were shown in the form of utterance that contains the taboo word. Data from the second problems were shown in the form of a table. The table contains the source language, target language translation and the translation procedure applied.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The taboo word and its translation were marked by bold words to be easily noticed by the reader.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Result and Discussions</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">The analysis is focused on the taboo words used by the characters and the Indonesian translation of taboo words in the movie. The taboo words are analyzed based on Jay's (1998) theory about ten types of taboo words. On the other hand, the theory from Vinay and Dalbernet (2004) about translation procedures are used to analyze the translation of taboo words in the movie. Below are the analysis of types of taboo words and the procedure of translation on taboo words that have been translated into Indonesian through the movie's subtitle.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Types of Taboo Words</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">(3-1) Wade : </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Fuck </span><span class="font4">Wolverine (00:02:16)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Data (3-1) occurs at the beginning of the movie. Here Wade Wilson feels dejected to Wolverine (the main character in one of the X-Man movies). Wade hates Wolverine because the X-Man movies made the same R-rated movie and up the ante by dying. The word </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">fuck </span><span class="font4">here was classified into a verb. Word </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">fuck </span><span class="font4">in this data was concluded into a taboo word. It was considered a restricted word since has a meaning as having sexual intercourse with someone. In this data the word </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">fuck </span><span class="font4">was uttered to harm a person. The taboo word </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">fuck </span><span class="font4">in this data was concluded into a cursing. Cursing is the category of the taboo word that is used to evoke harm to another person by using certain words or phrases. These words are imbued with a power to them mainly through religious or social demarcation.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">(3-2) Wade : then the hairy </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">motherfucker </span><span class="font4">ups the ante by dying (00:02:21)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">The taboo word in data (3-2) occurs when Wade explains his movie to the viewer. The word </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">motherfucker </span><span class="font4">was classified into a noun. Word </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">motherfucker </span><span class="font4">is an offensive word. It gains universal restriction and it cannot be used freely. This taboo word was concluded into obscenity.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 29 No.2</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Obscenity words are considered the most offensive and are rarely if ever used in public media. </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Motherfucker </span><span class="font4">means a despicable or very unpleasant person. The word </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">motherfucker </span><span class="font4">in this data was referred to Wolverine. Wade said Wolverine was an unpleasant person.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">(3-3) Wade : W</span><span class="font4">hat a </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">dick</span><span class="font4">! (00:02:25)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The taboo word in data (3-3) occurs after Wade tells the audience about the other movie that makes him feel dejected. He shows his dejected feeling by saying “what a </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">dick</span><span class="font3">”. The word </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">dick </span><span class="font3">is sexual. It was classified into a noun based on the word class. The word </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">dick </span><span class="font3">is a taboo word. This word should not be uttered in such speech. This word concluded as obscenity. </span><span class="font4">Obscenity words are considered the most offensive and are rarely if ever used in public media. Word </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">dick </span><span class="font4">literally means a man sexual part. This type of taboo word gains a universal restriction. Obscenities are pointedly sexual in nature. This kind of expression is indecent. It is offensive and repulsive. To call a word obscene means that it cannot be used freely.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">(3-4) Wade : that babysitter of yours is high as </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">fuck </span><span class="font4">right now (00:07:12)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">In data (3-4) Wade actually speaks to the viewer and guesses that they are glad to leave their kids at home and thrusting their babysitter to take care of them. However, Wade gives the viewer a bad suggestion by saying “that babysitter of yours is high as </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">fuck </span><span class="font4">right now”. The Word as </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">fuck </span><span class="font4">in this data was an adverb. The word </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">fuck </span><span class="font4">was concluded into a too word. This word gained a universal restriction and should not be uttered in public. According to the types of taboo words, this word concluded into obscenity. Obscenities are pointedly sexual in nature. This kind of expression is indecent. It is offensive and repulsive. To call a word obscene means that it cannot be used freely.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">(3-5) Dopinder : I </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">shit </span><span class="font4">my pants (00:08:25)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">In data (3-5) Dopinder feels scared after Wade jumps in his car by the rear window and straight to hit the car’s throttle. Due to Wade's action, he said “I </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">shit </span><span class="font3">my pants”. The word shit was classified into a verb. The</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">word </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">shit </span><span class="font3">in this case is a taboo word since it has a meaning as human waste processes. It concludes into a scatology type. </span><span class="font4">Scatology refers to human waste products or processes.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">(3-6) Vanessa : no, </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">dick </span><span class="font4">for brains (00:12:30)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The taboo word </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">dick </span><span class="font4">in this data was classified into a noun. This word concluded into a taboo word since it is a sexual word and meaning as man intimation. This word concluded into an obscenity. Obscenity is sexual in nature. This word cannot be used freely, especially in public media. Obscenity laws control the content of books and broadcasts. It is an offensive word when it is applied to someone. In this data, the phrase </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">dick </span><span class="font4">for brain was used to represent a stupid person in a despicable way or a person with a nasty thought.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">(3-7) Althea : it is a little hard to hear you with that pity </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">dick </span><span class="font4">in your mouth (00:22:40)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">In data (3-7) Wade was talking to Althea and blaming himself for Vanessa’s death. Althea who is a blind person could not hear what Wade was talking and saying “it is a little hard to hear you with that pity </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">dick </span><span class="font3">in your mouth” to Wade. The word </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">dick </span><span class="font3">was concluded into a taboo word and classified into a noun. </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Dick </span><span class="font3">is a word for man’s sexual organ. This word should not be uttered in a public place or media. This word was concluded into obscenity. Obscenities are pointedly sexual in nature. It is offensive and repulsive.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">(3-8) Wade : you wasting your time, shinning </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Jesus </span><span class="font4">(00:27:40)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The taboo word in data (3-8) occurs when Collosus persuade Wade to become X-Man. However, Wade refused to do it by saying Collosus was a shinning </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Jesus</span><span class="font4">. This word is classified into a noun. The word </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Jesus </span><span class="font4">was a taboo word based on religious distinction. Profanity would be a word or phrase with seeks not to denigrate God, religion or holy but would be based on ignorance of these matters. Here Wade was ignorant of the guideline of the religious order. He was ignorantly brought God’s name in his utterance. Furthermore, in his utterance, he refers Collosus as </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Jesus</span><span class="font4">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 29 No.2</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">(3-9) Russell : </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">fucker </span><span class="font4">hates mutant (00:47:33)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">In this data, the word </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">fucker </span><span class="font4">was classified into a noun. This word was concluded into obscenity type of taboo word. According to English dictionary, </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">fucker </span><span class="font4">means an unpleasant person or stupid person. The word </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">fucker </span><span class="font4">was uttered by Russell while talking with Wade in their cell. </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Fucker </span><span class="font4">was referred to the headmaster in the mutant rehabilitation school by Russell. He said </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">fucker </span><span class="font4">as the headmaster because he hates him. This word is offensive, especially when uttered in public media. It cannot be used freely. According to Jay, obscenity laws control the content of the books and the content of broadcast.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">(3-10) Russell : Tomorrow, we find the biggest guy in here and we’ll make him our </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">bitch </span><span class="font4">(00:47:48)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The situation in data (3-10) occurs when Russell talk to Wade about taking his revenge on the headmaster in the mutant’s rehabilitation place who have a willingness to remove the mutants gen by torturing them. Here Russell wants to recruit the biggest guy in the jail to make him his </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">bitch </span><span class="font4">to fulfil his ambition. The word </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">bitch </span><span class="font4">is classified as a noun and taboo word since it has a literal meaning as a female dog. However, in this data, the word </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">bitch </span><span class="font4">means a derogatory term to a subordinate person since it refers to a male. The word </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">bitch </span><span class="font4">is concluded as an insult. Insults and slurs are verbal attacks on other people. These words are spoken to harm the people by the word alone. It is an animal imagery insult.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Translation Procedures</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">After the analysis of the taboo words in Deadpool movie, below were the analyses of the translation procedure of taboo words from English to Indonesian. Each data of the translation procedure analysis was written inside the table.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Table (3-1)</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">English</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Indonesian</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Translation Procedure</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Wade : </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Fuck</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Wade :</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Literal</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Wolverine</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Wolverine</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">translation</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">(00:02:16)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">brengsek</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font3">The data (3-1) indicated the taboo word </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">fuck </span><span class="font3">translated into </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">brengsek</span><span class="font3"> in the target language. </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Brengsek</span><span class="font3"> is a word that is used when someone feels angry and disappointed. Word </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">brengsek</span><span class="font3"> also has a meaning as an unpleasant person. Furthermore, in English, the word </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">fuck </span><span class="font3">used when someone feels angry and disappointed. This translation concluded as a literal translation. Literal, word for word, translation is a translation procedure where the source language text is directly transferred into grammatically and idiomatically appropriate target language text.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Table (3-2)</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">English</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Indonesian</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Translation Procedure</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Wade : then the</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Wade : lalu si</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Literal</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">hairy</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">bedebah</span><span class="font4"> itu</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">Translation</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">motherfucker</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">menaikan</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">ups the ante by</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">taruhanya</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">dying (00:02:21)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">dengan mati</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font4">The taboo word in data (3-2) was translated to </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">bedebah</span><span class="font4"> in the target language. The word </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">bedebah</span><span class="font4"> in the target language means a despicable person. By considering the translation product in the target language, this translation applied the literal translation procedure. The meaning of the</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 29 No.2</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">source language text was directly transferred into grammatical and idiomatically appropriate target language text. In principle, a literal translation is a unique solution reversible and complete in itself. The translation does not need to make any change other than the obvious one, like those concerning grammatical concord or inflectional endings.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Table (3-3)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">English &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Indonesian &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Translation</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Procedure</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Wade : What &nbsp;Wade : dasar &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Equivalence</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">a </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">dick</span><span class="font4">! &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">menyebalkan</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">(00:02:25)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The word </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">dick </span><span class="font4">in the source language is translated to </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">menyebalkan</span><span class="font4"> in the target language. In the target language, </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">menyebalkan</span><span class="font4"> means irritating. This word is used to show a dejected feeling. This translation is done through an equivalence procedure. The word in the source language was not directly translated into the target language since the word </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">dick </span><span class="font4">in the source language has a meaning as man sexual part. In this data, the word </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">dick </span><span class="font4">represents an irritating situation. In the target language text, the word </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">menyebalkan</span><span class="font4"> was an adjective and it showed a characteristic of a situation. The word in the target language describes the same situation as in the source language by a different style and structural method.</span></p>
<div>
<p><span class="font4">Table (3-4)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">English</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<p><span class="font4">Wade : that babysitter of yours is high as </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">fuck </span><span class="font4">right now (00:07:12)</span></p>
<div>
<p><span class="font4">Indonesian</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<div>
<p><span class="font4">Translation Procedure</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<div>
<p><span class="font4">Wade : pengasuh anakmu saat ini sedang </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">teller</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<div>
<p><span class="font4">Literal translation</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<p><span class="font4">The taboo word in data (3-4) was translated through the phrase high as </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">fuck</span><span class="font4">. In this case, the word </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">teler</span><span class="font4"> in the target language has the same meaning as high in the source language and the word as </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">fuck </span><span class="font4">was not directly translated in the target language. The translator in this case translated the phrase high as </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">fuck </span><span class="font4">into </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">teler</span><span class="font4"> in the target language. The translation procedure applied was literal translation due to the direct transfer of the meaning in the source language text into the target language. However, this translation actually reduced the taboo content in the target language.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Table (3-5)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">English &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Indonesian &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Translation</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Procedure</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Dopinder : I &nbsp;Dopinder : aku &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Literal</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">shit </span><span class="font4">my &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">buang air</span><span class="font4"> di &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Translation</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">pants &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;celana</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">(00:08:25)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The word </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">shit </span><span class="font4">is translated to </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">buang air</span><span class="font4"> in the target language. The source language text is directly translated into the target language text. In the target language </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">buang air</span><span class="font4"> has the same meaning as </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">shit </span><span class="font4">in the source language. However, the words </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">buang air</span><span class="font4"> in the target language has a</span></p>
<div>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 29 No.2</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<div>
<p><span class="font4">more general meaning as the human waste process. The word </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">shit </span><span class="font4">means human waste process on poop while the word </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">buang air</span><span class="font4"> means human waste process on piss or poop. It is concluded into a literal translation procedure since Literal translation is the direct transfer of a source language text into a grammatically and idiomatically appropriate target language text. In principle, a literal translation is a unique solution reversible and complete in itself.</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<div>
<p><span class="font4">Table (3-7)</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<div>
<p><span class="font4">English</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<div>
<p><span class="font4">Indonesian</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<div>
<p><span class="font4">Translation Procedure</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<div>
<p><span class="font3">Table (3-6)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">English &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Indonesian &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Translation</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Procedure</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Vanessa : no, &nbsp;&nbsp;Vanessa : tidak, Equivalence</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">dick </span><span class="font4">for brain &nbsp;</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">bodoh</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">(00:12:30)</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<div>
<p><span class="font4">Althea : it is a Althea : agak sulit little hard to &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;mendengarkan</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">hear you with &nbsp;&nbsp;mu dengan </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">penis</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">that pity </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">dick &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font4">menyedihkan di</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">in your mouth &nbsp;&nbsp;mulut mu</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">(00:22:40)</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<div>
<p><span class="font4">Literal translation</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<div>
<p><span class="font4">In data (3-6) the taboo word in the source language was not directly translated into the target language. Here the translator translated the idiom </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">dick </span><span class="font4">for brain which contained the taboo word into the target language. The source language </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">dick </span><span class="font4">for brain is translated to </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">bodoh</span><span class="font4"> in the target language. The idiom </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">dick </span><span class="font4">for brain means a stupid person or having a low level of intelligence. In the target language that clause is translated to </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">bodoh</span><span class="font4">. In Indonesian, the word </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">bodoh</span><span class="font4"> also have the same meaning as stupid. This translation concluded as equivalence since the source language text is translated in different stylistic and structural methods but still share the same meaning.</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<div>
<p><span class="font4">The word </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">dick </span><span class="font4">in the source language was translated to </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">penis</span><span class="font4"> in the target language. The translation procedure applied in this translation was literal translation procedure. Through the meaning, both </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">dick </span><span class="font4">and </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">penis</span><span class="font4"> share the same meaning as a man’s sexual organ. The meaning of the source language text was directly transferred into grammatical and idiomatic appropriate target language text. However, the meaning of the word </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">penis</span><span class="font4"> in the target language has more politeness to be uttered rather than the word </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">dick </span><span class="font4">in the target language. The word </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">dick </span><span class="font4">is more offensive and is usually found in an informal conversation</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<div>
<p><span class="font3">Table (3-8)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">English</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<div>
<p><span class="font4">Indonesian</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<div>
<p><span class="font4">Translation Procedure</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<div>
<p><span class="font4">Wade : you &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Wade: kau</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">wasting your &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;buang – buang</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">time, shining &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;waktu, </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Yesus</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Jesus &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font4">berkilau</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">(00:27:40)</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<div>
<p><span class="font4">Litral translation</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<div>
<p><span class="font4">In data (3-8), the source language word </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Jesus </span><span class="font4">is translated to </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Yesus</span><span class="font4"> in the target language.</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 29 No.2</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">This translation is concluded as a literal translation. The meaning of the word in the source language is directly transferred into the target language. Literal, or word for word, translation is the direct transfer of a source language text into a grammatically and idiomatically appropriate target language text in which the translator's task is limited to observing the adherence to the linguistic servitudes of the target language. In principle, a literal translation is a unique solution reversible and complete in itself. The translation does not need to make any change other than the obvious one, like those concerning grammatical concord or inflectional endings.</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td colspan="3" style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">Table (3-9)</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">English</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Indonesian</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Translation Procedure</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Russell : </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">fucker </span><span class="font4">hates mutant (00:47:33)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Russell : </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">dia </span><span class="font4">benci mutan</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Literal translation</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font4">In data (3-9) the taboo word </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">fucker </span><span class="font4">was referred to the headmaster in the mutant rehabilitation school. In the source language </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">fucker </span><span class="font4">means an unpleasant person. The translator translated the word </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">fucker </span><span class="font4">into </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">dia</span><span class="font4"> in the target language. In this translation, the word class from the source language has changed in the target language. In the source language, the word </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">fucker </span><span class="font4">was a noun but in the target language, the word </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">dia </span><span class="font4">was a pronoun. Although there was a change in the word class this translation concluded into a literal translation. The meaning in the source and target language was referred to the headmaster and it was directly translated in the target language. However, there was no taboo content in the target language.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Table (3-10)</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">English</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Indonesian</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Translation Procedure</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Russell :</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Russell : besok</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Literal</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">Tomorrow,</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">kita akan cari</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">translation</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">we find the</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">orang terbesar</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">biggest guy</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">di penjara ini</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">in here and</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">dan akan kita</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">we’ll make</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4">jadikan </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">anak</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">him our</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">buah</span><span class="font4"> kita!</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">bitch</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">(00:47:48)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font4">In data (3-10, the word </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">bitch </span><span class="font4">in the source language is translated to </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">anak buah</span><span class="font4"> in the target language. The translation procedure applied in data (3-10) is concluded as a literal translation. The word </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">bitch </span><span class="font4">means as a subordinate person and the word </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">anak buah</span><span class="font4"> in the target language also means a subordinate person under a leader. The meaning in the source language is directly transferred idiomatically appropriate into the target language. The translation does not need to make any change other than the obvious one, like those concerning grammatical concord or inflectional endings.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">In this study many taboo words were found in the movie. However, not all types of taboo words were found. The data shows the types of taboo words found were obscenity, cursing, scatology, profanity and insult. In the analysis of the translation procedure, literal translation procedure was the most procedure used by the translator followed by equivalence translation procedure. There were only two translation procedures were used by the translator.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 29 No.2</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;References</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Anderson, S. R. (2010). </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">How Mani Language Are There in The World?</span><span class="font4"> Lingistic Society of America.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Asriana, R. (2019). Procedures of TranslatingDialoguesin Lewis Carroll’s Alice’s Adventures in Wonderlandfrom English into Indonesian. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Journal of Literatures, Linguistics and Culture Studies</span><span class="font4">, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Vol. 8</span><span class="font4">, pp 51-59.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">C. Dow, D. (2009). </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Motion Picture Ratings</span><span class="font4">. The First Amandement Encyclopedia. : </span><a href="https://www.mtsu.edu/first-amendment/article/1247/motion-picture-ratings"><span class="font4">https://www.mtsu.edu/first-amendment/article/1247/motion-picture-ratings</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font4">Dian, F. (2016). </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Indonesian Translation of Taboo Words in Hangover 1&amp;2 Movies</span><span class="font4">. Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Fairman, C. (2009). </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Fuck: Word Taboo and Protecting Our First Amendment Liberties</span><span class="font4">. Sphinx Publishing.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Hatim, B., &amp;&nbsp;Munday, J. (2004). </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Translation: An Advanced Resource Book</span><span class="font4">. Routledge.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Hejwowski, K. (2018). Applied Linguistics and Translation Studies. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">A Journal of English Studies</span><span class="font4">, pp 4-10.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Hunges, G. (1991). </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Swearing: A Social History of Foul Language, Oaths and Profanity in English</span><span class="font4">. Blackwell Publisher Ltd.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Jay, T. (1992). </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Cursing in America: A Psychological Study of Dirty Language in The Courts, in The Movies, in The Schoolyards and The Street</span><span class="font4">. John Benjamin Publishing Company.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Larson, M. L. (1984). </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Meaning-Based Translation: A Guide to Cross-Language Equivalence</span><span class="font4">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">University Press of America.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Nago, Y. (2018). </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">An Analysis of Vinay and Dalbelnet’s Translation Procedures Used in The Fault in Our Star Novel</span><span class="font4">. Sanata Dharma Uiversity.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Newmark, P. (1988). </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">A Textbook of Translation</span><span class="font4">. Pretince Hall.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Northquist, R. (2017). </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Taboo Language</span><span class="font4">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Thoughco. </span><a href="https://www.thoughtco.com/taboo-language-1692522"><span class="font4">https://www.thoughtco.com/taboo-language-1692522</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font4">Noviyanti. (2014). </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Translation of Taboo Words in Scary Movie 3 and Avatar</span><span class="font4">. Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">O’Connell, E. (2007). Screen Translation. In </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">A Companion to Translation Studies</span><span class="font4"> (p. pp 120-133). Multilingual Matters Ltd.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Stephan, C. (2018). </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Here Are The Top Ten</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Highest-Grossing Movies of 2018</span><span class="font4">. Pastemagazine. </span><a href="https://www.pastemagazine.com/movies/box-office/here-are-the-top-ten-highest-grossing-movies-of-20/"><span class="font4">https://www.pastemagazine.com/movies/box-office/here-are-the-top-ten-highest-grossing-movies-of-20/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font4">Stephanie, G. (2016). </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Research Method: Qualitative Research and Quantitative Research</span><span class="font4">. Statics How To.</span></p>
<p><a href="http://www.statisticshowto.com/research-methods-qualitative-research-and-quantitative-research/"><span class="font4">http://www.statisticshowto.com/research-methods-qualitative-research-and-quantitative-research/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font4">Suttleworth, M., &amp;&nbsp;Cowie, M. (1997). </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Dictionary of Translation Studies</span><span class="font4">. St. Jerome Publishing.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Wardhaugh, R. (2000). </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">An Introduction to Sociolinguistics</span><span class="font4"> (Third Edition). Blackwell Publisher Ltd.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Wirastama, P. (2018). </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Mengenal Markas Lebah Ganteng, Pein Akatsuki, dan Para Penerjemah Subtitle</span><span class="font4">. Medcom.</span></p>
<p><a href="https://www.medcom.id/hiburan/eksklusif/nN951G"><span class="font4">https://www.medcom.id/hiburan/eksklusif/nN951G</span></a><span class="font4"> RN-mengenal-markas-lebah-ganteng-pein-akatsuki-dan-para-penerjemah-subtitle</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">164</span></p>