---
layout: full_article
title: "The Element of Plot and Setting of Raya and The Last Dragon"
author: "I Wayan Andi Purnama Yasa, I Wayan Mulyawan, Ni Ketut Alit Ida Setianingsih"
categories: linguistika
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/full-99534 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/id-99534"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/full-99534"  
comments: true
---

<p><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/linguistika/"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/linguistika/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">DOI: </span><a href="https://doi.org/10.24843/ling.2023.v30.i01.p10"><span class="font1">https://doi.org/10.24843/ling.2023.v30.i01.p10</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">LINGUISTIKA, MARET 2023</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">p-ISSN: 0854-9613 e-ISSN: 2656-6419</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 30 No.1</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>The Element of Plot and Setting of </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Raya and The Last Dragon</span></h1>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><sup>1</sup> I Wayan Andi Purnama Yasa <sup>2</sup> I Wayan Mulyawan <sup>3</sup> Ni Ketut Alit Ida Setianingsih </span><span class="font4"><sup>1</sup>Denpasar, <sup>2,3</sup>English Department, Udayana University, Indonesia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">e-mail: </span><a href="mailto:1andipurnama200300@gmail.com"><span class="font4"><sup>1</sup>andipurnama200300@gmail.com</span></a><span class="font4"> <sup>2</sup> </span><a href="mailto:wayan_mulyawan@unud.ac.id"><span class="font4">wayan_mulyawan@unud.ac.id</span></a><span class="font4"> <sup>3</sup> </span><a href="mailto:alit_ida@yahoo.com"><span class="font4">alit_ida@yahoo.com</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstract</span><span class="font3">— </span><span class="font4">A story's plot is the series of events that make up the story. Plot entertains readers to turn the pages of a literary work. Setting refers to the time and space in which the events of the plot happen. It means that in analysing the setting, one should analyse the main event in the plot arranged in a story. Sometimes discussing the plot and setting there is still in the analysis that needs to be explained more deeply and incomplete according to the story in the movie. This study aimed to identify the plot’s elements and analyse in detail the setting in every sequence in </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Raya And The Last</span><span class="font4"> Dragon movie. The theories applied DiYanni (2004)'s theory of plot and Kenny's theory (1966) of setting were both used in this study. Data of this study was taken from observation and taking note of the movie, and script of the movie, the method applied was a qualitative method. The collected data were selected and put into plot and type of setting categories, which were descriptively analysed based on the theory applied. The results of this study show that the plots of this movie consist of five parts, namely exposition, complication, turning point or climax, falling action, and is ended by a resolution (denouement). The setting of this story can be analysed in terms of the type of setting which includes a neutral setting and a spiritual setting.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Keywords</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">: </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Plot, Setting, Movie.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstrak</span><span class="font3">— </span><span class="font4">Plot cerita adalah serangkaian peristiwa yang membentuk cerita. Plot menghibur pembaca untuk membalik halaman sebuah karya sastra. Pengaturan mengacu pada waktu dan ruang di mana peristiwa plot terjadi. Ini berarti bahwa dalam menganalisis latar, seseorang harus menganalisis peristiwa utama dalam plot yang diatur dalam sebuah cerita. Terkadang membahas plot dan setting masih ada dalam analisis yang perlu dijelaskan lebih dalam dan tidak lengkap sesuai dengan cerita yang ada di film. Penelitian ini bertujuan untuk mengidentifikasi elemen plot dan menganalisis secara detail latar dalam setiap urutan dalam film </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Raya And The Last Dragon.</span><span class="font4"> Teori-teori yang diterapkan dalam penelitian ini adalah teori plot yang dikemukakan oleh DiYanni (2004) dan teori setting oleh Kenny (1966). Data penelitian ini diambil dari observasi dan pencatatan film, dan naskah film, metode yang diterapkan adalah metode kualitatif. Data yang dikumpulkan dipilih dan dimasukkan ke dalam kategori plot dan jenis pengaturan, yang dianalisis secara deskriptif berdasarkan teori yang diterapkan. Hasil penelitian ini menunjukkan bahwa plot film ini terdiri dari lima bagian, yaitu eksposisi, komplikasi, titik balik atau klimaks, intensitas menurun, dan diakhiri dengan resolusi (kecaman). Latar cerita ini dapat dianalisis dari segi jenis setting yang meliputi setting netral dan setting spiritual.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Kata kunci: </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Plot, Setting, Film.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 30 No.1</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Introduction</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Nowadays, various entertainments provide us with inspiration and information. The entertainments provide us a medium to enjoy other people's creations, it contains literature. As for literature, Moleong (2000:13), is human conduct results in knowledge that is used to reflect on and communicate experience. Because literature illustrates life as it might exist in social reality, learning literature can assist us in better comprehending life, in particular the environment, culture, and values. People can appreciate a variety of literature products, including songs, novels, poems, and movies. Stamp and Raengo (2004:81) A movie is classified as a literary work because it is a creative work of art.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Movie is form of media that is a significant impact on information distribution and as a means of communicating a message to an audience or group of people. The message might be good or bad depending on the viewer according to the movie's visualization. According to Hornby (1995), A defined movie is a story, etc. that has been recorded as a series of moving pictures being shown on television or in a theater, also Yousuf and Dadabhoy (2013:17), A movie can show the audience an image and thus present themselves to the viewers clearly. Most of the movies are adapted from real life in the world and the others are adapted from books, novels, and comics. For example, the movies adapted from comics are Black Panther, Iron Man, Spiderman, etc. Kenny (2004:43) mentioned that the element of fiction includes plot, character, setting point of view, style and language, symbol, irony, and theme. Meanwhile, this study focuses on the plot and setting.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">According to Freytag (1863) claimed that elements of plot include exposition, rising action, climax, falling action, and is ended by the denouement. DiYanni (2004) mentioned also that elements of the plot consist of an exposition, complication, turning point or climax, falling action, and is ended by a resolution (denouement). While the time and location of the plot's events are referred to as the setting. This means that when</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">analysing the setting, one should also examine the central conflict of the story's plot. (Kenny, 1966:38). The Setting, in particular story events, may be the most crucial component in a given author's work. In many fictions works, the moment the action occurs is crucial. There are from types, and elements of setting.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">In this study, the researcher chooses to use the theory elements of plot proposed by DiYanni (2004) and theory types of setting by Kenny (1966) because are clear and easy to understand of both theories. The previous study by Indah (2004) </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">A study of plot, character, and setting to convey the theme as seen in Hemingway’s The Garden of Eden</span><span class="font4"> was discussing about the plot and setting but there is still the analysis that needs to be explained more deeply, that is why in this study would like to discuss that topic in detail.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">This analysis focused on the plot and setting in movie </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Raya And The Last Dragon</span><span class="font4">. The movie was released in 2021 directed by Don Hall and Carlos López Estrada and produced by Walt Disney Animation Studios. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Raya And The Last Dragon</span><span class="font4"> movie was chosen because in the website </span><a href="https://disney.fandom.com"><span class="font4">https://disney.fandom.com</span></a><span class="font4"> the discussion that conveyed was incomplete in the plot because; First, in the second paragraph of the website does not explain in detail what happened to Raya when Namaari was with her in the temple where the gemstone was kept, who protected the gemstone with Raya and the weakness of the Druun is not mentioned which is actually told in the beginning of the film. Second, In the fourth paragraph the incident when Raya met a baby and The Ongis did not explain why he adopted the baby and when Sisu was held hostage by the tribal chief was also not explained. Last, in Paragraph eight does not explain why Raya invites all countries to come to the land of the heart. This phenomenon was related to seeing that the movie was also interesting from the plot and setting</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Theory</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">The nature of this study was literary analysis with a descriptive qualitative approach that focuses on the plot and setting elements of the</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 30 No.1</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">movie. This is a drama analysis study; this research is included in a library study.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">For this study, the data were taken from the movie through observation method. Observation described as a method to observe and describe information and data. In this case, the technique in use is note-taking. It is effectively used to collect the data of analysis because it’s a suitable method and technique for collecting the valid data. The data was gathered by performing the following steps: First, the watching the movie and reading the transcript carefully and second, taking notes on various aspects of the plot and setting.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">In achieving the results of this study, the data collected was analyzed using a qualitative method. This method was applied to answer the predetermined problem formulation and to describe also give a clear explanation that relevant to the aims of the study. A descriptive technique is used in this study to explain the analysis. Moreover, the data was analysed through several steps; First, identifying the elements of the plot based on DiYanni’s, theory (2004). Second, analysing types of setting proposed by Kenny’s theory (1966). Third, making conclusions from the results of the analysis.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The analysis of this study was presented using formal and informal methods, completed with the narrative techniques. According to Sudaryanto (1993), proposed there are two methods of presenting data analysis, informal and formal methods. He stated that the informal method refers to the method of presenting the analysis by verbal statements, while the formal method refers to signs, figures and symbols. The two methods described above were used to present the findings and discuss the elements of the plot and types of setting. In this study, an informal method was applied because the analysis was delivered in the form of a description. Meanwhile, Formal methods are also used because there were pictures or figures to support the analysis. The pictures represented the screenshot of the movie also the transcript discussed the detailed descriptions of each the elements of plot and types of setting.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Result and Discussion.</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">The elements of plot and setting In this chapter, talked about the movie Raya And The Last Dragon. Data in this analysis that taken through Carlos López Estrada and Don Hall’s movie entitled </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Raya And The Last Dragon</span><span class="font4">.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>3.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Exposition</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">An Exposition is “Background information” which means that the exposition describes the setting, and major character before the story's main action starts. Additionally, it describes the beginning of the problem as well as some essential events in the story.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">“I know what you're thinking.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">A lone rider.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">A dystopian world.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">A land that's gone to waste.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">How did this world get so broken?</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Well, that all began 500 years ago.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Kumandra.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">This is what we used to be.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">When our land was whole, and we lived harmoniously alongside… dragons.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Magical creatures who brought us water and rain and peace.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">It was paradise.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">But then, the Druun came.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">A mindless plague that spread like wildfire, multiplying as they consumed life and turned everyone they touched into stone.” </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">(00:50-03:07)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The story begins in a world where Druun, an evil creature, has turned people to stone. Raya, a female traveler, and Tuk-tuk, a large pangolin friend, were exploring Kumandra at the time. She then recounted the events that preceded this, specifically the tale of the dragons and the Druun. People were prosperous and coexisted peacefully with dragons 500 years ago. Only the last dragons survived after the evil Druun appeared out of nowhere and shattered the world, turning its inhabitants and dragons into stone. Then he fashioned a magical gem that could both put things right and wipe out the Druun. No one returned</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 30 No.1</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">besides the dragons, and Sisu, the final dragon, also vanished. This, rather than being a unifying factor, is what divides Kumandra's nations because of their hostilities over the dragon Sisu's gems.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>3.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Complication</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Complication or intensification is the interaction or relationship between a character and an event that creates tension and leads to the development of a problem from a fictional situation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Six years of searching and we end up at a literal shipwreck.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">That’s not a bad sign, is it?</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Sisudatu…</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Um…</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">I don’t know if you’re listening.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">I’ve searched every river to find you, and now I’m here at the very last one.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Look, there’s not a lot of us left, and we really… We really need your help.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">If I can be honest, I really need your help.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">I made a mistake.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">(20:20-43:17)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">This A problem arises when Raya was looking around in order to get to the river's end. Following Druun's turning of her father into stone, Raya spent six years traversing the entire length of the river in order to meet the dragon, as Namaari claimed. Sisu came back to get the gem. Druun ambushed Raya and Tuk-tuk when they reached the end of the final river she desired to see. Fortunately, Raya took the gem shard and shielded herself with it, allowing Druun to flee.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>3.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Turning Point or Climax</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">The climax is a moment of great tension that is the high point of interest in the story. The reader wonders the story turns towards its resolution at this point, which is the highest point in the ascending series in fiction and the point at which force in conflict reaches its highest intent signification.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">What’s that mean?</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">It means we’re on.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Sisu, until we get that gem and confirm Namaari’s actually on our side, promise me you’ll stay hidden.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">I see you got my gift.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">I never thought I’d see this again.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Well, uh… I tried to take good care of it.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">You’re not the only dragon nerd here.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">The final piece.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">(01:15:30-01:23:35)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Illustrates the completion of Namaari and Raya's Covenant in the morning. They met close to the Fang Land Palace because she wanted Sisu to remain hidden until she gave the stone. Namaari carried out what she had promised. She was excited to meet and greet Sisu when she was revealed. Behind it all, Namaari was shooting an arrow at Sisu, demanding that they both be taken to Fang's palace, as her mother had clearly ordered. This shocked Raya and her friends to see it. Sisu converses with Namaari as well in an effort to win her over and win her trust. She was talking to him when she was going to shoot the arrow, The arrow was dropped by Raya using her sword, but Namaari's hand caught it and fired the arrow, striking Sisu in the chest. Sisu was killed and then completely disappeared.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>3.4 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Falling Action</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Falling action, the conflict of the story is getting reduced, happens as a result of the crisis and it is the part when the reader knows that the story will reach the ending or the resolution.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">SISU: I don’t know why they chose me.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">It could have been any of us.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">All I know is I trusted them, and they trusted me.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">And so…</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Everyone, give me your gems.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">We can still put it together. It can still work.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">(01:23:42-01:30:11)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">According to data, Suddenly, the gift that Raya gave Namaari was an accessory in the shape of a dragon. As they were shown to be trapped in the hole with Drunn, they were fortunate to have</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 30 No.1</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">the gem shards with them so they could keep them away from it even though they couldn't linger like that. Sisu collapsed next to Raya, and she observed it and recalled Sisu's claims that it was because she and her brother believed in them. That is what makes Raya think that fusing the gem shards will be able to put everything back together, but Raya's friends are still skeptical of Namaari because they think she killed Sisu. Raya handed it to Namaari first, then to the rest of her friends, in an attempt to convince Namaari to trust her. Namaari struggled to put the gem shards together because she was perplexed and eventually gave in to Raya's other friends and allowed herself to be eaten. After waiting for a while, the magic that was beginning to fade suddenly came back to life. When the Druun vanished, rain began to fall, bringing back to life both the other dragons, including Sisu, as well as those who had been turned to stone by the Druun.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>3.5 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Resolution</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Resolution is the final situation or sorted out and resolved, which suggests not only a satisfactory resolution of the current situation but also a clarification of all miscommunications and secrets, as well as how the story will end, which could be happy, sad, or mysteriously.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Raya.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Sisu.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">I am so hungry.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">I got some jerky.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Not that hungry.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Sisu!</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Aw, it’s good to breathe in your glorious dragon stench again.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Okay, I take that as a compliment. </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">(01:30:56-01:35:00)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">For the resolution, it concludes with Sisu's happiness; Raya and her friends meet Sisu joyfully; Raya and her friends returned to their respective countries to meet their families who had turned to stone; and Raya returned to meet her missing father. Chief Benja, Raya's father, was astonished and delighted to meet Raya and Sisu. The entire</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">country, however, came to the land of the heart to declare that they would band together and revert to being Kumandra, not just the two of them.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>3.6 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Neutral setting</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">A neutral setting is a setting that is little more than a reflection of the truth that things have to be happening somewhere. It can be an important point in that movie.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Tail Desert. (00:50-01.00)</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">The first location in the film was The Tail Desert, which Raya and her friend Tuk-tuk explored in the early hours of the morning. The desert is home to numerous stone statues that have been attacked by Druun. They wander in search of the river's end while telling the tale of how it came to be a dystopian world, a world that was once a paradise filled with peace and wealth, as people frequently pass through the area as the main route in the country of the tail.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Heart Temple (00:50-03:07)</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">The struggle that took place over a dragon gem that was kept there in the temple was depicted in the evening's second neutral setting, The Heart Temple. A dragon gem that contained magic to exterminate the Druun was positioned, but because a nation sought to take possession of it, something unexpected happened. After a struggle that caused it to fall and break, the Druun returned. It turned out to be known by the father of Raya and other nations.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark24"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark25"></a>3.7 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Spiritual setting</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">A spiritual Setting is the principles implied or embodied by the physical environment. It manifests as the characters' upheld traditions, values, and beliefs. As a result, the neutral setting's value is covered by the spiritual setting.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark26"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark27"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Ancestral Story (01:25-03:05)</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">The Dragon Gem was the first event in this story that was passed down from one generation to the next, and the Ancestral Story was the first</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 30 No.1</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">scene in a spiritual setting that depicts the origin of the Druun. The setting was referred to as a spiritual environment since it contains a belief. Dragons and humans live in harmony in Kumandra. Raya initially accepts this story before going in search of the final dragon at the river's mouth.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark28"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark29"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Banquet for Guests (08:11-13:08)</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">The third part of the spiritual setting was the banquet for guests, which displayed Southeast Asian customs and culture, particularly those of Indonesia. As we can see in that scene, some are winnowing traditional rice, decorating the castle with flowers, and making batik, which was popular in Indonesia. The chief of Benja's preparations to host guests from all over the nation for a shared meal is also described. Here, local food and wine are served, similar to a royal banquet in other locations.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark30"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark31"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">The conclusion of this study was explained to answer the formulation of the problems that had been determined. Based on the objectives of this study, an analysis of the plot and settings contained in the movie </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Raya And The Last Dragon</span><span class="font4"> has been obtained, which includes problems with the elements of plot as well as the types of setting contained in the movie. This final chapter, it is part of the conclusions for the overall results of this study</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The structure of the plot used in the movie </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Raya And The Last Dragon</span><span class="font4"> is The elements of the plot of this story. The elements of the plot are divided into five parts, namely exposition, complication, turning point or climax, falling action, and is ended by a resolution (denouement). This movie has different peaks, the plot structure includes two parts of the exposition and four parts of complications with chronological events.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The setting of this story is also analysed in terms of the type of setting which includes a neutral setting and a spiritual setting. The setting occurs in five lands of Kumandra with many</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">cultural backgrounds that mingle with varieties of different cultures from Southeast Asia.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark32"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark33"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;References</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Ashida &amp;&nbsp;Kojiri (2019). Plot-Creation Support With Plot-Construction Model For Writing Novel. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Information &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;And</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Telecommunication, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Vol.3.1.57-73.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Available at</span><a href="https://www.researchgate.net/"><span class="font4"> </span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://www.researchgate.net/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font4">Brooks, C. &amp;&nbsp;Warren, R. P. (1957). </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Understanding poetry: an anthology for college students. Holt.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Creswell, J.W. (2014). </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Research Design, Qualitative, Quantitative, and Mixed Methods Approaches</span><span class="font4"> (Fourth Edition ed.). California: SAGE Publications, Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">DiYanni, R. (2004). </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Literature: approaches to fiction, poetry, and drama</span><span class="font4">. New York McGraw Hill Higher Education, Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Don, H. and Carlos, L. E. (2021, March 3rd). </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Raya And The Last Dragon.</span><span class="font4"> Retrieved June 20th, 2021, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;from &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Savefilm21</span></p>
<p><a href="http://173.212.233.209/raya-and-the-last-dragon-2021/"><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">http://173.212.233.209/raya-and-the-last-</span></a><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;"></span><a href="http://173.212.233.209/raya-and-the-last-dragon-2021/"><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">dragon-2021/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font4">Freytag. G. (1863). </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Freytag’s Technique of The Drama: &nbsp;An Exposition of Dramatic</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Composition and Art.</span><span class="font4"> Scott, Foresman. Princeton University</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Indah. (2004). A Study Of Plot, Character, And Setting To Convey The Theme As Seen In Hemingway. Journal Of Arts And Humanities Vol.19.1.45-51 Available at </span><a href="https://repository.usd.ac.id/"><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://repository.usd.ac.id</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font4">Irawan, D. (2015). Structural Analysis Of Plot In Rick Riondan’s “Percy Jackson And The Olympians Journal Of Arts And Humanities Vol.16.2.200-209.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Kenney, W. (1966). </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">How to Analyse Fiction</span><span class="font4">. United State of America: Monarch Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Lehnert, W.G. (1981). </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Plot Units and Narrative Summarization.</span><span class="font4"> A Multidisciplinary Journal, Vol.5. 293-331. Available at: </span><a href="https://www.sciencedirect.com/"><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://www.sciencedirect.com</span></a></p>
<div>
<p><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/linguistika/"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/linguistika/</span></a></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<div>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">DOI:</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"> </span><a href="https://doi.org/10.24843/ling.2023.v30.i01.p10"><span class="font1">https://doi.org/10.24843/ling.2023.v30.i01.p10</span></a></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<div>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 30 No.1</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<div>
<p><span class="font4">Stamp, and Raengo. (2004). </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Literature and Film: A guide to the Theory and Practice of Film Adaption.</span><span class="font4"> Oxford: Blackwell</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Tussadiyah. (2012). An Analysis of plot and characterization in Sparks’s The Choice.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Ulla Kallenbach. (2018). “</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Towards a Spectatorial Approach to Drama Analysis”</span><span class="font4"> Nordic Theatre Studies journal, Vol. 30, 2018, 22– 39</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Wellek, R., and Warren, A. (1948). </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Theory of Literature.</span><span class="font4"> New York: Harcourt, Brace and Company.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Yousuf and Dadabhoy (2013). </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Use of Films for Teaching Social Values in English Classes at Elementary Level Journal of Elementary Education</span><span class="font4"> Vol.23, No. 1 pp. 41-52</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<p><span class="font0">77</span></p>