---
layout: full_article
title: "Revealing Household Economic Welfare and Resilience"
author: "Kadek Rai Suwena, Komang Krisna Heryanda, M. Rudi Irwansyah"
categories: jekt
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/jekt/full-99864 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/jekt/id-99864"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/jekt/full-99864"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1">pISSN : 2301 – 8968</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">JEKT ♦ 16 [2] : 319-331</span></p>
<div>
<p><span class="font1">eISSN : 2303 – 0186</span></p>
</div><br clear="all"><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font5"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Revealing Household Economic Welfare and Resilience</span></h1>
<p><span class="font4">Kadek Rai Suwena, Komang Krisna Heryanda, M. Rudi Irwansyah</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">ABSTRACT</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Prosperity provides opportunities for households to achieve economic resilience. Economic resilience is a condition and ability to recover and rise from problems in economic aspects. The welfare condition of women in freelance daily labor households in Tiyingtali Village has not been able to reflect the economic resilience of households. This research reveals the motivation and role of women in Tiyingtali Village who work as casual daily laborers in the household to achieve prosperity and economic resilience. By using a qualitative approach, these two problems become a complex thing to discuss. Through qualitative analysis with stages: 1) data collection; 2) Data reduction; 3) Presentation of data; 4) Conclusion drawing/Verification, the welfare and economic resilience problems of women's freelance daily laborer households can be explained. To ensure the validity of the research data obtained, triangulation of sources is then carried out. Research findings show that &quot;Gunakaya&quot; (fighting spirit to have wealth alone or with a husband) is a motivation. This motivation leads to the condition of a prosperous family. Not having savings for supplies, makes for a lack of household economic resilience. The inability of freelance daily working women to set aside their income makes it an obstacle to realizing household economic resilience. Efforts to fulfill the household economy of husband and wife must help each other to create economic resilience.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Keywords: casual day labor, welfare, economic resilience</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Klasifikasi JEL: C68, F43, L52</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">INTRODUCTION</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">In order to improve the quality of human resources, it is necessary to expand the rights, obligations, positions, capacities, roles, opportunities, independence, and mental and spiritual resilience of women (Hubeis, 2010). Strong determination with the ability they have to be able to help the household makes women complete the work that is their responsibility. This strong determination is shown by a</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">multitasking attitude, namely women are able to do several jobs at the same time. This multitasking attitude is an advantage of women compared to men, but this attitude also causes the results of work done by women to be not optimal. The results of the work that are not optimal are caused because women do their work not focused and in a hurry.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The results of research by development scientists note that women play an</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">important role</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">in development. Hubeis, (2010) research results show that the role of women can be viewed from two perspectives, namely the role perspective in the domestic sphere and the role perspective in the public sphere. The feminist spirit provides opportunities for women to be able to obtain equal rights in the public sphere. The rights obtained in the public sphere have so far not been in accordance with what women have hoped for. Women workers are exploited, the rights of women workers are violated and are not in accordance with regulations issued by the government. This condition causes many women workers to resign. These unfavorable conditions for women workers do not make women give up, women can realize economic independence by continuing to work according to their talents, potential and abilities. The independence of women in helping the household economy gives a signal that the role of women is important in the household</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">public. There needs to be a balance</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">between how important the role of women is and how attached they are to the house which functions as a place of socialization, reproduction and production. (Ihromi, 1995).</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The role of women in having children has always been seen as the most important at home. In fact, women are not only sexual symbols in the home; they also have the duty of passing on offspring. Women also help support family income and manage family finances to ensure prosperity. A strong household economy can make it easier for a family to deal with financial problems. A household's ability to meet physical needs shows how stable they are financially (clothing, food, housing, education and health) (Alie &amp;&nbsp;Elanda, 2019).</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Tiyingtali Village is one of the villages in Abang District, Karangasem Regency, with a general description of having a larger population of women than men. From</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The total population is 4,548 people, 2,267 people are male and 2,281 people are female. The large number of female</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">residents provides an initial illustration that the role of women in the household will certainly play an important role in the household. The role of women in the household can be seen from roles in the domestic sector (as a housewife who carries out reproductive and social functions) and the public sector (as a woman who is able to work in the economic sector to help the household). The large number of women is not accompanied by an adequate level of education. These conditions force women to choose casual daily labor as a type of work that is expected to help the household economy. In addition to these conditions, from the type of work of the residents in Tiyingtali Village, there are still many household conditions that are more dominant in the prosperous family stage I. The National Population and Family Planning Agency (BKKBN)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">uses 23 indicators to show the five stages of family welfare (Widjajanti Isdijoso, Asep Suryahadi, 2016). Five signs that a household in a prosperous condition is able to: (1) perform religious rituals; (2)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">meet food needs at least twice a day; (3) meet various needs for clothing at home, work, school, and when traveling; (4) meet the need for houses with floors other than land; and (5) meet the needs of health facilities. Out of a population of 4,548 people living in Tiyingtali Village, 1,116 heads of households are in the prosperous category I. Lacking education and skills, women choose to work as casual daily laborers to help meet family needs and maintain family welfare.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Bunsaman (2018) in his research stated that women have two roles in improving the household economy. The first role in the household, including the role of mother and husband's companion. The second role outside the household is as a breadwinner helping</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">husband. The participation of women in working in the informal sector shows that women carry out both roles simultaneously, namely the role of women as housewives and the role of women as workers in the public sector. Carrying out these two roles simultaneously illustrates that the role of</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">women is so important in the drama of development (Michael P. Todaro, 2011). Different conditions described by Fitriyah et al. (2013) in their research stated that there is a secondary position of women in the household. Customs and norms limit women in their roles, men are placed as heads of households as well as leaders in the household with power in the hands of men. Making men as decision makers in the household and making women as wives who are in the shadow of their husbands. This condition causes women to become a marginalized group even though women have contributed to improving the household economy and even more than that</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">her husband's income. Women's participation in the public sector with income contributions given to households is only considered as a side job (Puspitawati, 2012).</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Related to the description that has been presented above, that women play an important role in the drama of development. The role of women in the drama of development is shown by the</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">large number of women who work to help support the household economy.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">RESEARCH METHODS</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Qualitative research with a case study approach is used in answering research problems. Women who work as daily laborers in Tiyingtali Village are the focus of this research. Household welfare and economic resilience are research objectives. Women who work as daily laborers in Tiyingtali Village are the main source of information. The aim is to learn more about the problems found in the research. In this study, the Head of Tiyingtali Village</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">are the most important people to talk to in order to get a general idea of the problem being researched. In addition to the main and key informants, this research also requires supporting informants, such as community leaders in Tiyingtali Village who know what women who work as daily laborers do.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">In this study, three different types of data collection procedures or techniques were used: 1) observation, 2) in-depth interviews, and 3) interviews. According</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">to Miles and Huberman, the stages of data analysis used in this research are as follows: 1) data collection, which includes all information that is observed and heard; 2) data reduction, which includes summarizing, selecting, and selecting the most important information to create a clearer picture; 3) display data; and 4) drawing conclusions (verification), namely drawing conclusions that are supported by data to ensure that the conclusions drawn are valid conclusions.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">There are limitations regarding the representativeness of the respondents in the study. In order to obtain truly valid data, the researcher carried out triangulation of sources by cross-checking the respondents in relation to the findings of the research results obtained. In addition to source triangulation, the researcher also conducted time triangulation by extending the research time to dig up more information about the phenomena resulting from the research.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">RESULTS AND DISCUSSION</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Women in the Economy</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Karangasem is a district with the largest percentage of poor people (6.98 percent) of the nine districts/cities in Bali (BPS, 2022). The number of poor people in Karangasem Regency even exceeds the average percentage of poor people in Bali Province (4.57 percent). The condition of poverty makes women participate in efforts to meet the needs of household life. The participation of women in efforts to meet household needs is more in the non-formal sector.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The non-formal economic sector is an option in helping to fulfill the household economy due to limited education and skills possessed. The limited education of women, especially in Karangasem Regency, can be seen from the Net Enrollment Rate (APM) at all levels of education. The low APM is indicated by the literacy rate, especially for women in Karangasem, which only reaches 78.16 percent. The literacy condition of women in Karangasem Regency is even below the average literacy rate for Bali Province which reaches 92.59 percent (BPS, 2022). Limitations of self-owned by</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">women do not discourage to be able to help the household in an effort to meet life's needs. Women participate in fulfilling the necessities of life by working according to their abilities. The magnitude of the role of women in development can be seen from the contribution of women's income in helping the family economy. Provincial Statistics Center</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Bali (2021) released that the average contribution of women's income to the district/city economy in Bali is 39.18 percent. Looking at the contribution of women, especially Karangasem Regency which is the Regency of Tiyingtali Village with an income contribution of 43.93 percent, the second largest of the eight districts and one city. The income contribution of women in Karangasem exceeds the average income contribution in Bali Province. This condition shows that the role of women is so great in helping the household economy in Karangasem Regency.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The role of women in the public sector explains that women also contribute to the</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">household economy. It is becoming increasingly clear that women do not only play a role as companions to their husbands in the household who have the obligation to educate and guide their children. Women also have a role in realizing household economic resilience. The role of women is able to explain that women are part of development</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">national. Bertram et al. (2011) from the results of his research stated that women have a moderate contribution in supporting household income. The amount of women's contribution is 40 percent to 50 percent of total household income. The women's contribution places women to be more equal to men in every decision-making opportunity in the household which causes women to be more important and valued.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Rasheed, Mwalu Paso, Abbas, &amp;&nbsp;Tian (2020) in their research in Pakistan stated that women's participation increases technical efficiency, providing evidence that women's participation has great potential in line with sustainable development goals. The multifunctional</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">role of women makes them even stronger in making decisions regarding family matters (Pogoy, Montalbo, Pañares, &amp;&nbsp;Vasquez, 2016). Meulen, Terluin, &amp;&nbsp;Matser (2015) in their research, women are more often involved in taking</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">strategic decisions than in operational decision making. Ponnusamy and Bonny (2017) in their research in Tamil Nadu and Kerala stated that the government needs to establish partnerships with the private sector to be able to provide support for the presence of women in the form of Public Private Partnerships (PPP).</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Women's Motivation to Achieve Goals</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The motivation of a person or group is what drives them to do something or not (Anton Irianto, 2005). According to Suryono (2017), motivation is a process that starts from a person's needs, which is then driven by something outside oneself, and finally becomes a goal. This statement is consistent with the viewpoint presented above. According to (Makmun, 2001), there are several indicators that can be used to determine individual motivation, including: 1) the presence of activity; 2)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">activity frequency; 3) next activity; 4) fortitude, tenacity, and ability to face challenges; 5) willingness to make sacrifices for the cause; 6)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">the level of aspirations to be achieved by the activities carried out; 7) output qualification level of the activities carried out; and 8) attitudes towards activity targets.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The majority of Balinese women see work as an offering (yadnya), and to prevent an imbalance between men and women, this yadnya must be based on sincerity. Even though Balinese women believe that there is an imbalance in the number of jobs at home, gender inequality does not manifest in a harmonious household where women see every role as an obligation (Rahmawati, 2016). In the context of this research, it is slightly different, where women in Tiyingtali Village interpret each of their roles not only as an obligation but also as a manifestation of self-esteem, the shame of having their own income in Balinese terms is often called &quot;gunakaya&quot; (fighting spirit to have</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">their own wealth or with husband).</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Daily Labor Women Last in Creating Wellbeing</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Women in Tiyingtali Village are forced to prefer working as casual daily laborers due to a lack of education. Women are motivated to work as casual daily workers to improve the household economy when the husband's contribution to support the household is limited. With limitations to support the household, husbands appreciate the existence of partners who do informal work and make extra efforts to ensure household welfare. (Utama, 2020) defines daily laborers as people who work for other businesses or individuals, earn relatively low wages, and depend on their presence. One of the jobs in the informal sector most often chosen by Tiyingtali Village women with relatively low education is working as casual daily labourers. Women can work as casual daily workers even though their physical condition often does not support them.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Women who work as casual daily laborers have a responsibility to improve welfare by organizing and managing everything</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">household needs. This responsibility is met before they start working as casual daily labourers. Tiyingtali Village women see every household activity not only as an obligation, but also as a form of self-esteem. Working as a freelance daily laborer is a job that can be relied upon to increase household income in order to meet the needs of everyday life. Fulfilling their daily needs with the income derived from working as casual daily laborers has made the women's households in Tiyingtali Village rise economically.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">An overview of the household economic resilience of women casual daily workers. Household economic resilience is a condition and capability that provides opportunities for households to bounce back from the problems they face in terms of the economic aspect (Briguglio and Cordina, 2014). Economic resilience is solely not only talking about how households are able to survive from an economic aspect, but also how the house is</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">households are able to explore existing</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">potentials to increase household income (BIS, 2016). According to the Bank of International Settlements (BIS), household economic resilience is the ability to recover from shocks and household financial imbalances.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">In general, marriage is used to form a family with the intention of creating a happy, prosperous and lasting family. If household members can carry out household tasks in a peaceful, peaceful and balanced manner, a strong household will be built. If household activities are carried out unevenly or some activities are impossible to carry out while others can be carried out steadily, then the household will never be prosperous.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Welfare and household resilience must coexist. The household functions as a coordinated unit in terms of economic production, with each member of the household working together to share</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">work. How successfully a family can meet its financial needs depends on the work of the individual who is responsible for the family.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Due to the erratic nature of the work women who work as casual daily labourers, their income from this work is not fixed. Women who work as daily workers do not give up trying to support the household even though they have no manpower and limited work that can be done due to their low level of education and skills. As a result, casual daily worker households are only able to provide their children's education up to junior high and high school because the income they earn is limited and varied. They had high hopes of providing higher education, but these hopes were dashed by the household's financial resources, which could not sustain them. This situation shows that women who work as casual daily laborers in Tiyingtali Village have not been able to raise their families to a higher level</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">family well-being level II, III, and III Plus.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Households of casual daily workers are also unable to set aside their income for savings to meet unexpected needs, apart from constraints in the field of education and income irregularities. A significant</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">demand for households that is impossible to fulfill is the need for savings. Because the indicators of basic needs and psychological needs are met, women who work as casual daily laborers in Tiyingtali Village can be classified into stage I prosperous families.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The Well-Being and Economic Resilience of the Household of Female Daily Laborers.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">A state of well-being is a state in which a person experiences peace and prosperity (outward well-being) (inner well-being). Welfare provides opportunities for households to develop their economic resilience. The capacity of a person to bounce back and overcome economic setbacks is known as</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">economic resilience. The welfare status of the household of female casual daily workers in Tiyingtali Village is unable to reflect the resilience of the household economy. As seen in households that do not have the resources to provide provisions in the event of an emergency, the indicators of self-actualization in the families of women casual daily workers</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">have not been able to fulfill them. While someone who depends on himself as a laborer and is unable to save for his daily needs is very appreciative, it becomes a heavy burden for casual daily workers to be able to do so. One of the obstacles in achieving household economic resilience is the inability of households to actualize themselves by setting aside part of their income.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The condition of being unable to create economic resilience does not mean that the household of female daily casual workers in Tiyingtali Village is not prosperous. The fulfillment of the household needs in question can be seen from the indicators: 1) with limitations that are capable</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">fulfill the obligation to fulfill the child's needs, 2) the ability to fulfill the obligation to create good relations with others, and 3) the ability to fulfill the obligation to create good relations with their Lord. The real fulfillment of this obligation can be seen when they have sons/daughters who are required to complete compulsory education, they are</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">able to fulfill it. Fulfillment of obligations as part of society, for example when there is an obligation to establish kinship with the people in their environment which is often termed &quot;menyama braya&quot;, they are able to fulfill. Then, most importantly, when they are required to be able to create a relationship with their God through the celebration of religious holidays, often termed “meyadnya” in Balinese society, women casual daily workers can carry it out well.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Telic Theory which states that achieving goals in the form of fulfilling needs causes</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">prosperous. The condition of the household of casual daily laborers is in the category of prosperous family I, but meeting the needs of the household even though they are still all within limitations makes the women in Tiyingtali Village proud. This pride increases women's selfesteem and makes women happy. It is this happiness that makes female casual daily workers in Tiyingtali Village feel prosperous.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">CONCLUSION</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Household economics is a study of how</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">household members meet their needs by working as a form of responsibility for the needs and happiness of household life. In general, Balinese women consider work as an offering (yadnya), a sense of sincerity and sincerity must underlie this yadnya. Women work sincerely and earnestly to earn a living to meet household needs because of the income earned by their husbands</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">insufficient. In the context of this research, it is slightly different, where women in Tiyingtali Village interpret each of their roles not only as an obligation but also as a manifestation of self-esteem, the shame of having their own income in Balinese terms is often called &quot;gunakaya&quot; (fighting spirit to have their own wealth or with husband).</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Female casual daily workers in Tiyingtali Village feel a sense of well-being as indicated by their ability to achieve household goals. The achievement of goals in the form of fulfilling needs causes prosperity. Fulfillment of needs in the household: 1) being able to fulfill the obligatory education obligations for</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">sons/ daughters; 2) fulfillment of obligations as part of society (menyama braya); and 3) being able to create a relationship with God through the celebration of religious holidays (meyadnya). Female daily casual workers can fulfill the three goals of household life and carry out the three goals of household life well, making women</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">in Tiyingtali Village is proud. The pride that is felt increases the self-esteem of women casual daily workers in Tiyingtali Village and makes the households of casual daily workers in Tiyingtali Village prosperous.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">REFERENSI</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Alie, A. and Elanda, Y. (2019), “PEREMPUAN DAN KETAHANAN EKONOMI KELUARGA (STUDI DI KAMPUNG KUE RUNGKUT SURABAYA)”, Journal of Urban Sociology, Vol. 2 No. 2, pp. 31–42.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Anton Irianto. (2005), Born To Win (Kunci Sukses Yang Tak Pernah Gagal, PT. Gramedia Pustaka Utama, Jakarta.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Bertram, Y.H., Ganefianti, D.W. and Andani, A. (2011), “PERANAN PEREMPUAN DALAM &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;PEREKONOMIAN</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">KELUARGA &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;DENGAN</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">MEMANFAATKAN SUMBERDAYA PERTANIAN ( WOMEN ROLE IN FAMILY ECONOMY WITH AGRICULTURAL RESOURCES</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">UTILIZING ) ABSTRACT”, AGRISEP, Vol. 10 No. 1, pp. 138–153.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">BIS. (2016), “Economic resilience: a financial perspective”, Bank for International Settlements, BIS website (</span><a href="http://www.bis.org"><span class="font3">www.bis.org</span></a><span class="font3">).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">BPS. (2022), Persentase Penduduk Miskin Provinsi Bali Menurut Kabupaten/Kota 2020-2022, BPS Bali, Denpasar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Briguglio, L. and Cordina, G. (2014), CONCEPTUALIZING &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;AND</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">MEASURING ECONOMIC.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Bunsaman, S.M. (2018), “PERANAN PEREMPUAN &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;DALAM</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">MENINGKATKAN KESEJAHTERAAN &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;EKONOMI</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">KELUARGA”, Prosiding Penelitian &amp;&nbsp;Pengabdian Kepada Masyarakat, Vol. 5 No. 2, pp. 146–157.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Fitriyah, V., Tridakusumah, A.C., Tumoka, N.D.Y., Laoh, O.E.H., Wangke, W.M., Puspitasari, N., Puspitawati, H., et al. (2013), “KONTRIBUSI DAN PERAN PRODUKTIF IBU DALAM MENINGKATKAN PENDAPATAN RUMAH TANGGA PETANI PADI Contribution And Productive Role Of Housewives In Increasing Household Income Of Rice Farmers”, Agri-Sosioekonomi, Vol. 6 No. 1, pp. 10–19, doi: 10.24156/jikk.2013.6.1.10.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Hubeis, A.V.S. (2010), No Title, 2nd ed., PT. Penerbit IPB Press, Bogor.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Ihromi. (1995), Kajian Wanita Dalam Pembangunan, 1st ed., Yayasan Obor Indonesia, Jakarta.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Makmun, A.S. (2001), </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Psikologi Kependidikan: Perangkat Sistem Pengajaran Modul</span><span class="font3">,</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Revisi, Ce., Remaja Rosdakarya, Bandung.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Meulen, H.A.B. Van Der, Terluin, I.J. and Master, I.A. (2015), “THE ROLE OF WOMEN ON DUTCH FARMS'', International Farm Management Congress, Vol. 1 No. July, pp. 450–457.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Michael P. Todaro, S.C.S. (2011), Pembangunan Ekonomi, 11th ed., Erlangga, Jakarta.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Pogoy, A.M., Montalbo, I.C., Pañares, Z.A. and Vasquez, B.A. (2016), “Role of Women Farmers in Improving Family Living Standard”, International Journal of Gender and Women’s Studies, Vol. 4 No. 1, pp. 54–60, doi: 10.15640/ijgws.v4n1p6.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Ponnusamy, K. and Bonny, B. (2017), “Impact of public private partnership model on women empowerment in agriculture Impact of public private partnership model on women empowerment in agriculture”, Indian Journal of Agricultural Sciences, Vol. 5 No. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;June, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;doi:</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">10.56093/ijas.v87i5.70127.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Puspitawati, H. (2012), GENDER DAN KELUARGA.Pdf, edited by Elviana, 1st ed., IPB Press, Bogor.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Rahmawati, N.N. (2016), “Perempuan Bali dalam Pergulatan Gender”, Jurnal Studi Kultural, Vol. I No. 1, pp. 58–64.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Rasheed, A., Mwalupaso, G.E., Abbas, Q. and Tian, X. (2020), “Women Participation: A Productivity Strategy in Rice Production”, Sustainability, Vol. 12, p. 15.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Suryono, A. (2017), Manajemen Sumber Daya Manusia: Etika Dan Standar Profesional</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Sektor Publik, Universitas Brawijaya Press, Malang.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Utama, Z.M. (2020), Manajemen Sumber Daya Manusia Konsep Dasar &amp;&nbsp;Teori Bahan Ajar Dan Pembelajaran MSDM, Cetakan pe., UNJ PRESS, Jakarta.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Widjajanti Isdijoso, Asep Suryahadi, dan A. (2016), Penetapan Kriteria Dan Variabel Pendataan Penduduk Miskin Yang Komprehensif Dalam Rangka Perlindungan Penduduk Miskin Di Kabupaten/Kota, edited by Handoko, G., The SMERU Research Institute, Bogor.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">331</span></p>