---
layout: full_article
title: "SEROTONIN PROFILE OF KINTAMANI DOGS IN THE BEHAVIOR OF GUNA, JAYA, PAKSA, TEK, KYUL (LOCAL BELIEFS) OF THE BALINESE COMMUNITY"
author: "Siswanto Siswanto, Nyoman Sadra Dharmawan, I Ketut Puja, I Gusti Agung Arta Putra"
categories: buletinvet
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/buletinvet/full-106129 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/buletinvet/id-106129"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/buletinvet/full-106129"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1">Buletin Veteriner Udayana &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Volume 15 No. 5: 1030-1034</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">pISSN: 2085-2495; eISSN: 2477-2712 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Oktober 2023</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Online pada: </span><a href="http://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/buletinvet"><span class="font1">http://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/buletinvet</span></a><a href="https://doi.org/10.24843/bulvet.2023.v15.i05.p"><span class="font1"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://doi.org/10.24843/bulvet.2023.v15.i05.p4</span></a><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">0</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Terakreditasi Nasional Sinta 4, berdasarkan Keputusan Direktur Jenderal Pendidikan Tinggi, Riset, dan Teknologi No. 158/E/KPT/2021</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">SEROTONIN PROFILE OF KINTAMANI DOGS IN THE BEHAVIOR OF GUNA, JAYA, PAKSA, TEK, KYUL (LOCAL BELIEFS) OF THE BALINESE COMMUNITY</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>(Profil Serotonin Anjing Kintamani pada Perilaku </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Guna, Jaya, Paksa, Tek, Kyul</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"> (Keyakinan Lokal) Masyarakat Bali)</span></h1>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>Siswanto<sup>1</sup>*, Nyoman Sadra Dharmawan<sup>2</sup>, I Ketut Puja<sup>3</sup>, I Gusti Agung Arta Putra<sup>4</sup></span></h2>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2"><sup>1</sup>Laboratory of Veterinary Physiology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Udayana University, PB. Sudirman St. Denpasar, Bali, Indonesia, 80234;</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2"><sup>2</sup>Laboratory of Veterinary Clinic, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Udayana University, PB. Sudirman St. Denpasar, Bali, Indonesia, 80234;</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2"><sup>3</sup>Laboratory of Veterinary, Genetic and Reproduction Technology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Udayana University, PB. Sudirman St. Denpasar, Bali, Indonesia, 80234; <sup>4</sup>Faculty of Animal Science, Udayana University, PB. Sudirman St. Denpasar, Bali,</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Indonesia, 80234.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">*Email:</span><a href="mailto:siswantofkh@gmail.com"><span class="font2"> </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">siswantofkh@gmail.com</span></a></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>Abstract</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">There is a belief in Bali which is the local wisdom of the Balinese people that the behavior of dogs is divided into </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">guna, jaya, paksa, tek</span><span class="font2"> and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">kyul</span><span class="font2">. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Guna</span><span class="font2"> is a dog with an obedient behavior, useful and suitable as a hunting dog. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Jaya</span><span class="font2"> is a dog with an attractive behavior, energetic, tends to be hyperactive. This type of dog is also good for hunting and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">paksa</span><span class="font2"> is a dog that is difficult to manage. This dog is suitable for house keeping. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Tek</span><span class="font2"> is a dog with dirty behavior and is difficult to train or manage and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">kyul</span><span class="font2"> is a dog with a lazy behavior. The results showed that the behavior or nature of dogs is related to serotonin compounds in the blood. Aggressive dogs such as jaya and paksa have a low serotonin level profile. The purpose of this study was to determine the serotonin profile of different behavior according to the beliefs of the Balinese people towards Kintamani dogs. A total of 30 Kintamani dogs were used as experimental animals. The research design used a cross-sectional study design. The ELISA method was used in this study to determine serotonin levels in the blood. The results of the serotonin profile showed that the dogs with the characteristics of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">guna, jaya, paksa, tek</span><span class="font2"> and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">kyul</span><span class="font2"> were 114.4 ± 24.51; 98.5±28.47; 269.9±87.8; 316.6±54.8 and 256±15.1 (mmol/dl). It was concluded that the profile of the Kintamani dog has normal serotonin levels.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Keywords: behavior; serotonin; dog</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>Abstrak</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">Terdapat kepercayaan di Bali yang merupakan kearifan lokal masyarakat Bali bahwa karakter anjing dibedakan menjadi </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">guna, jaya, paksa, tek</span><span class="font2"> dan </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">kyul</span><span class="font2">. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Guna</span><span class="font2"> adalah anjing dengan perilaku penurut, berguna dan cocok digunakan sebagai anjing pemburu. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Jaya</span><span class="font2"> adalah anjing perilaku atraktif, energik, cenderung hiperaktif, anjing jenis ini juga baik untuk berburu dan </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">paksa</span><span class="font2"> adalah anjing yang sulit diatur, anjing ini cocok untuk penjaga rumah. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Tek</span><span class="font2"> adalah anjing berperilaku kotor dan sulit dilatih ataupun diatur serta </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">kyul</span><span class="font2"> adalah anjing perilaku pemalas. Hasil penelitian menunjukkan bahwa perilaku atau sifat pada anjing berkaitan dengan senyawa serotonin dalam darah. Anjing yang galak (agresif) seperti pada </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">jaya</span><span class="font2"> dan </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">paksa</span><span class="font2"> mempunyai profil kadar serotonin yang rendah. Tujuan penelitian ini untuk mengetahui profil serotonin pada karakter yang berbeda menurut kepercayaan masyarakat Bali terhadap anjing kintamani. Sebanyak 30 ekor anjing kintamani digunakan sebagai hewan coba. Rancangan penelitian</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">menggunakan rancangan </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">crosssecsional study</span><span class="font2">. Metoda elisa digunakan dalam penelitian ini untuk mengetahui kadar serotonin dalam darah. Hasil profil serotonin menunjukkan bahwa anjing perilaku </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">guna</span><span class="font2">, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">jaya</span><span class="font2">, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">paksa</span><span class="font2">, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">tek</span><span class="font2"> dan </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">kyul</span><span class="font2"> berturut-turut adalah 114,4±24,51; 98,5±28,47; 269,9±87,8; 316,6±54,8 dan 256±15,1 (mmol/dl). Disimpulkan bahwa profil anjing kintamani menurut kepercayaan lokal masyarakat Bali mempunyai kadar serotonin yang normal.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Kata kunci: perilaku; serotonin; anjing</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>INTRODUCTION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">Serotonin compounds are neurotransmitter compounds, namely compounds that function to transmit impulses from one neuron to the next neuron (Frazer and Hensler, 1999). Serotonin is formed in serotonergic neurons in the central nervous system. This compound is also found in enterochromaffin cells in the digestive tract (Jensen, 2007). Several studies have been conducted on the relationship between serotonin levels and dog character. The results of the studies that have been conducted show that serotonin is involved in behavioral responses such as aggression and feelings. Aggressive dogs show low blood levels of serotonin (Amat </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">et al., </span><span class="font2">2013; Alberghina </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">et al.,</span><span class="font2"> 2016). Animals such as dogs that have a low profile of serotonin can cause mood disorders, such as anxiety, depression and their turn becomes aggressive, obsessive-compulsive disorder, phobias, stress, and can cause epilepsy. Dogs can suffer from emotional problems such as anxiety, fear and anger, so dogs can suffer from behavioral changes such as depression, stress-related disorders, irrational fears and obsessive compulsive disorder. Emotional feelings such as anxiety, fear and anger are closely related to blood serotonin.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Several factors can affect serotonin levels in a dog's blood such as race (Höglund et al. 2018), food in this case tryptophan (Andrea </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">et al.,</span><span class="font2"> 2015; Riggio </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">et al.,</span><span class="font2"> 2021), body size (Siswanto </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">et al., </span><span class="font2">2023).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Serotonin has been involved in almost all types of behavior, such as appetite, emotional, motor, cognitive and autonomic. However, from a physiological perspective,</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">it is unclear whether serotonin affects behavior specifically or more generally by coordinating the activity of the nervous system, especially to regulate activity situations in relation to arousal. The main piece of data that has contributed to the view that serotonin has a general effect on behavior by modulating nervous system activity comes from studies of the level of serotonergic activity in the soma raphe nuclei in the brain (Frazer, 1999).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">However, exposing a stressed cat to environmental situations, such as loud noises or the sight of a dog, while producing strong sympathetic activation and a characteristic behavioral response, did not change the firing rate of serotonergic neurons. Thus, the type of motor activity that activates the serotonergic soma appears to be repetitive. Furthermore, activation of serotonergic transmission inhibits information processing in the afferent nervous system. From all these data, it was concluded that the serotonergic nervous system influences behavior (Frazer and Hensler, 1999). Mann (2013) from the results of his study argues that the serotonin system is involved in both diathesis (decision making) and major depression. It is clear that serotonin has to do with feelings as well as in deciding a problem.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">With regard to the behavior or character of dogs, the Balinese believe in ancestral culture that has existed for a long time from generation to generation as local wisdom and it is recorded in lontar that dogs have five categories of behavior (Asu, 2017). The five behaviors are arranged sequentially from number one to number five. This behavior is written on Lontar Siksan Wawalungan, Griya Pada, Kerambitan, in the order </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">guna, jaya, paksa,</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">tek</span><span class="font2"> and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">kyul</span><span class="font2">. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Guna</span><span class="font2"> is a dog that has good character, obedient useful and suitable as a hunting dog. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Guna</span><span class="font2"> is interpreted as a dog with good character, so it is very useful for the owner. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Jaya</span><span class="font2"> means that this dog is good, energetic and even tends to be hyperactive, so it needs special handling to be used as a hunting dog. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Jaya</span><span class="font2"> is a dog that has good character for hunting. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Paksa</span><span class="font2"> is a dog that has a lazy character, so it takes coercion to chase or order this dog. This type of dog is not suitable to be used as a hunting dog and is only suitable for guarding the house. This </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">tek</span><span class="font2"> dog is suitable for hunting use, but has a short life. Meanwhile, other sources state that </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">tek</span><span class="font2"> is a dog that has the behavior of going to people who are having celebrations (in the local language it is called odalan) (Dharmawan, 2009). According to the local community, this type of dog will come when they hear the sound of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">tek</span><span class="font2"> (the sound of people chopping meat and spices) through their senses of hearing and smell. Furthermore, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Kyul's</span><span class="font2"> behavior describes a dog that has a lazy character, only likes to eat and sleep, so it is not good to be used as a hunting dog.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">If the behavior according to the belief of the Balinese people is related to aggressiveness, a dog that behaves triumphantly and forcefully is a dog that is most likely to have a low (aggressive) serotonin profile.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>RESEARCH METHODS</span></h2>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>Research design</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">The research design used a crosssectional study design and the results are presented in descriptive. Sampling was carried out using a purposive system (nonrandom or determined sampling).</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>Sample</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">Thirty dogs were used in this study, all dogs were observed for clinical symptoms and were physically healthy, and were not currently undergoing therapy. The dogs come from Sukawana village, Kintamani sub-district, Bangli district, Bali.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Approximately 3 ml of blood samples were taken from the jugular vein from 30 dogs inserted into a blood collecting tube (blood collecting tube) anticoagulated EDTA. It is put in a cooling box and taken to the laboratory to determine the level of lactic acid (indirect ELISA). MyBioSource Southern California, San Diego, USA serotonin kit was used in this study.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>Data analysis</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">Analysis of variance was used to assess serotonin levels (Steel and Torrie, 1981). P value &lt;&nbsp;0.05 was considered significant for all analyses. Data were analyzed using SPSS software.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>RESULTS AND DISCUSSION</span></h2>
<h2><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>Results</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">The results of the ELISA test on serotonin levels from 30 blood samples are </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">guna</span><span class="font2">: 114,4±24,51, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">jaya</span><span class="font2"> 98,5±28,47, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">paksa </span><span class="font2">269,9±87,8, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">tek</span><span class="font2"> 316,6±54,8 and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">kyul </span><span class="font2">256±15,1 (mmol/dl). Hasil data dan uji statistik dipaparkan di Tabel 1 dibawah ini.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>Discussion</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">Serotonin as a serotogenic compound comes from food consumed, namely tryptophan. Serotonin is formed when the amino acid L-tryptophan is broken down in the liver by the enzyme tryptophan hydroxylase. This breakdown process produces 5-hydroxytryptophan (5-HTP), which is a direct precursor of serotonin. Serotonin travels through the bloodstream, crosses the blood-brain barrier, and enters brain tissue. Once in the brain, 5-HTP is converted into 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT), better known as serotonin. The serotonin that is formed is then stored in the nerves. When serotonin levels are balanced, you feel calm, sleep better and stress less. The decreased effect of serotonin causes depressive or apathetic moods, restless thoughts and insomnia/sleep disturbances. The effect of serotonin on sleep is primarily related to the hormone melatonin. Melatonin is the main hormone responsible for maintaining proper circadian rhythms (sleep/wake cycles) in the body. Serotonin</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">in the brain is converted to melatonin because the body needs it (Frazer and Hensler, 1999; McKee and McKee, 2003).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In its function as a neurotransmitter compound, serotonin which is used in the brain as a neurotransmitter must be produced in the brain, because this compound cannot cross the blood-brain barrier. The existence of stimulation in the neuron will cause serotonin in the bag at the end of the axon in the synapse, to come out and deliver the stimulus to the next neuron (Frazer and Hensler, 1999).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Balinese people traditionally believe that the character of dogs can be grouped into five, namely guna, jaya, forced, tek and kyul. These five characters are seen from their aggressive nature (aggressiveness) have different levels of aggressiveness. Aggressiveness test can be known by knowing levels of serotonin in the blood. The results of previous studies show that serotonin levels in the blood are related to the character/aggressiveness of dogs (Alberghina </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">et al.,</span><span class="font2"> 2019; Diana </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">et al.,</span><span class="font2"> 2020; Bacqué-Cazenave </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">et al.,</span><span class="font2"> 2020; Riggio </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">et al.,</span><span class="font2"> 2021).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The results showed that the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">jaya </span><span class="font2">character had the lowest serotonin levels and was statistically significantly different from the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">paksa</span><span class="font2"> dog, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">tek</span><span class="font2"> and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">kyul</span><span class="font2"> characters. A dog with a winning character shows that the dog has an aggressive character. Apart from being a good dog, the g</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">una</span><span class="font2"> dog has relatively low serotonin levels and is quite an aggressive dog, but statistically not much different from the winning dog. Furthermore, the enforced dog characters, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">tek</span><span class="font2"> and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">kyul</span><span class="font2">, all three had high serotonin levels and there was no statistically significant difference between the three. The dogs are not aggressive.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark24"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark25"></a>CONCLUSION AND SUGGESTION</span></h2>
<h2><a name="bookmark26"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark27"></a>Conclusion</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">Testing serotonin levels can help determine the aggressiveness of dog behavior based on local Balinese beliefs. Successful behavior shows the lowest serotonin profile and dogs with this</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">serotonin profile show more energetic and aggressive behavior. Then followed by the dogs behaving </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">guna, force, tek</span><span class="font2"> and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">kyul.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark28"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark29"></a>Suggestion</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">It is known that the serotonin profile in Kintamani dogs is known, therefore it would be good if studies and research were carried out on serotonin in other animals in Bali.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark30"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark31"></a>ACKNOWLEDGEMENT</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">Thank you to the Klianbanjar and the head of Suwana village for the permission to be the research site.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark32"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark33"></a>REFERENCES</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">Alberghina D, Tropia E, Piccione G, Giannetto C, Panzera M. 2019. Serum serotonin (5-HT) in dogs </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">(Canis familiaris)</span><span class="font2">: Preanalytical factors and analytical procedure for use of reference values in behavioral medicine. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">J. Vet.Behav</span><span class="font2">. 32(7-8): 7275.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Amat M, Brech SL, Camps T, Torrente C, Mariotti MV, Ruiz JL, Manteca X. 2013. Differences in Serotonin Serum Concentration between Aggressive English Cocker Spaniels and Aggressive Dogs of Other </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Breed</span><span class="font2">s</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">. J. Vet. Behav.</span><span class="font2"> 8(1): 19–25.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Andrea KT, Astrid-Simone G, Simona Z, Cristina P, Ileana B, Liliana C, Ioan T. 2015. The Impact of Dog Feeding on their Aggressiveness. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Adv. Anim. Vet. Sci.</span><span class="font2"> 3(9): 503-506.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Bacqué-Cazenave J, Bharatiya R, Barrière G, Delbecque JP, Bouguiyoud N, Giovanni GD, Cattaert D, Deurwaerdère AD. 2020. Serotonin in Animal Cognition and Behavior. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Int. J. Mol. Sci.</span><span class="font2"> 21(5): 1649.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Asu C. 2017. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Katalog Buku Salinan Lontar</span><span class="font2">. Perpustakaan Kedong Kertya. No. 392.IIIc. Singaraja.</span></p>
<p><a href="https://bulelengkab.go.id/assets/instansikab/124/bankdata/katalog-buku-salinan-lontar-iii-46.pdf"><span class="font2">https://bulelengkab.go.id/assets/instan</span></a><span class="font2"> </span><a href="https://bulelengkab.go.id/assets/instansikab/124/bankdata/katalog-buku-salinan-lontar-iii-46.pdf"><span class="font2">sikab/124/bankdata/katalog-buku-</span></a><span class="font2"></span><a href="https://bulelengkab.go.id/assets/instansikab/124/bankdata/katalog-buku-salinan-lontar-iii-46.pdf"><span class="font2">salinan-lontar-iii-46.pdf.</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">Dharmawan INS. 2009. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Anjing Bali dan Rabies</span><span class="font2">. Cetakan Pertama. Penerbit: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Buku Arti</span><span class="font2">. Arti Foundation. Denpasar, Bali.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Diana J, Rayment A, Richard A, Peters A, Linda C, Marston A, Groef BD. 2020. Relationships &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;between &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;serum</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">serotonin, plasma cortisol, and behavioral factors in a mixed-breed, -sex, and -age group of pet dogs. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">J. Vet. Behav.</span><span class="font2"> 38(6-8): 96-102.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Frazer A, Hensler JG. 1999. Serotonin Involvement in Physiological Function and &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Behavior. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;In: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Basic</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Neurochemistry: Molecular, Cellular and Medical Aspects</span><span class="font2">. &nbsp;&nbsp;6<sup>th</sup> Ed.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">University of Texas Health Science Center. Texas.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Höglund K, Häggström J, Hanås S, Merveille C, Gouni V, Wiberg M, Lundgren J, Mc Entee K, Sørensen ML, Tiret L, Seppälä EH, Lohi H, Chetboul V, Fredholm M, Lequarré AS, Ljungvall I. 2018. Interbreed variation in serum serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine) concentration in healthy dogs</span><span class="font0">. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">J. Vet. Cardiol.</span><span class="font2"> 20(4): 244-253.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Jensen P. 2007. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Behavioural Biology of Dogs</span><span class="font2">. Publisher: CABI ProQuest. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Ebook Central</span><span class="font2">. Penerbit Cromwell Pres.</span></p>
<p><a href="http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/u"><span class="font2">http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/u</span></a><span class="font2"> nud-ebooks/detail.action?doc Created from unud-ebooks on 2018-02-28 19:11:44.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Mann JJ. 2013. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Serotonergic System in Mood Disorders and Suicidal Behaviour</span><span class="font2">. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Royal Society</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Publishing. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;DOI:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">10.1098/rstb.2012.0537.</span></p>
<p><a href="http://rstb.royalsocietypublishing.org/content/368/1615/20120537"><span class="font2">http://rstb.royalsocietypublishing.org/</span></a><span class="font2"> </span><a href="http://rstb.royalsocietypublishing.org/content/368/1615/20120537"><span class="font2">content/368/1615/20120537.</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">McKee T, McKee JR. 2003. Biochemistry: The Molecular Basis of Life. 3th ed. Pub. McGraw-Hill. New York.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Riggio G, Mariti C, Sergi V, Diverio S, Gazzano A. 2021. Serotonin and Tryptophan Serum Concentrations in Shelter Dogs Showing Different Behavioural Responses to a Potentially Stressful Procedure. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Vet. Sci.</span><span class="font2"> 8(1): 1.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Siswanto, Dharmawan INS, Puja IK, Putra IGAA. 2023. The Relationship of Body Size to Behavior in Kintamani Dogs. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Bul. Vet. Udayana.</span><span class="font2"> 15(2): 320324.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">T</span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">abel 1. Serotonin levels in Kintamani dog’s behavior of </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">guna</span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">jaya</span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">paksa</span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">tek</span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">, an</span><span class="font2">d </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">kyul</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Variable</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Guna</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Jaya</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Paksa</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Tek</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Kyul</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Level serotonin</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">114,4<sup>a</sup></span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">98,5<sup>a</sup></span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">269,9<sup>b</sup></span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">316,6<sup>b</sup></span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">256<sup>b</sup></span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">SD</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">±24,51</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">±28,47</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">±87,8</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">±54,8</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">±15,1</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font2">Description: different superscript letters in the same row, indicating significance (P&lt;0.05).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">1034</span></p>