---
layout: full_article
title: "An Analysis of Code Mixing Found in the Indonesian Movie:  Cek Toko Sebelah"
author: "Putu Rosalina Adnyani, Sang Ayu Isnu Maharani, Putu Weddha Savitri"
categories: linguistika
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/full-86805 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/id-86805"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/full-86805"  
comments: true
---

<p><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/linguistika/"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/linguistika/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">DOI: </span><a href="https://doi.org/10.24843/ling.2023.v30.i01.p01"><span class="font2">https://doi.org/10.24843/ling.2023.v30.i01.p01</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">LINGUISTIKA, MARET 2023</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">p-ISSN: 0854-9613 e-ISSN: 2656-6419</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 30 No.1</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>An Analysis of Code-Mixing Found in the Indonesian Movie: </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Cek Toko Sebelah</span></h1>
<p><span class="font3">Putu Rosalina Adnyani<sup>1</sup>, Sang Ayu Isnu Maharani <sup>2</sup>, Putu Weddha Savitri <sup>3 1</sup>English Department, Udayana University, Indonesia <sup>2</sup>Udayana University, Indonesia <sup>3</sup>Udayana University, Indonesia</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">e-mail:</span><a href="mailto:rosalinaadnyani@yahoo.com"><span class="font3"> </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">rosalinaadnyani@yahoo.com</span><span class="font3"> </span></a><span class="font3"><sup>1</sup>,</span><a href="mailto:isnu_maharani@unud.ac.id"><span class="font3"> </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">isnu_maharani@unud.ac.id</span><span class="font3"> </span></a><span class="font3"><sup>2</sup>,</span><a href="mailto:weddha_savitri@unud.ac.id"><span class="font3"> </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">weddha_savitri@unud.ac.id </span></a><span class="font3"><sup>3</sup></span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstract—</span><span class="font3">This study aims to 1) describe the types of code-mixing used by actors in the film &quot;Cek Toko Sebelah&quot; and 2) describe the reasons for using the code-mixing. This study uses a qualitative method. The object of this research is code-mixing contained in the film Cek Toko Next. This research data are in words, phrases, and sentences containing mixed codes of English and Indonesian. This study uses the observation method in collecting data. The data were then analyzed using Muysken's theory for the types of code-mixing. Based on the analysis conducted, this study found three code-mixing types: insertion code-mixing, alteration code-mixing, and congruent lexicalization code-mixing. In addition, there are two motives for using codemixing used in the Indonesian film &quot;Cek Toko Sebelah,&quot; namely the motive for filling in needs and the motif for filling in prestige.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Keywords</span><span class="font3">: types of code mixing, reasons of using code mixing, movie</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstrak—</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Penelitian ini bertujuan untuk 1) mendeskripsikan jenis-jenis campur kode bahasa yang digunakan aktor dalam film “Cek Toko Sebelah”, dan 2) mendeskripsikan alasan penggunaan campur kode tersebut. Penelitian ini menggunakan metode kualitatif. Objek dalam penelitian ini adalah campur kode yang terdapat dalam film Cek Toko Sebelah. Data penelitian ini berupa kata, frasa, dan kalimat yang mengandung campur kode bahasa Inggris dan bahasa Indonesia. Penelitian ini menggunakan metode observasi dalam mengumpulkan data. Data kemudian dianalisis menggunakan teori Muysken untuk jenis-jenis campur kode. Berdasarkan analisis yang dilakukan, penelitian ini menemukan tiga jenis campur kode, yaitu campur kode penyisipan, campur kode alterasi, dan campur kode leksikalisasi yang kongruen. Selain itu, terdapat dua motif penggunaan campur kode yang digunakan dalam film Indonesia Cek Toko Sebelah, yaitu motif isian kebutuhan dan motif isian gengsi.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Kata Kunci: </span><span class="font3">jenis campur kode, alasan penggunaan campur kode, film</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 30 No.1</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Introduction</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">In our daily life, we will be faced with different society who has the different language. It makes possible to us facing the problem of communication in different situation. In communication, the relation between language and society cannot be separated. The study about the relation of language and society is called sociolinguistics. Human is a social creature who needs to connect and to communicate each other to deliver their idea, express their feelings and opinions, and share their thought. Communication is the most fundamental in the delivery of intent or purpose. In everyday life, people sometimes communicate with different languages and it could become one of many obstacles face by some people in the process of communication in their society.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Mayerhoff (2018) explained sociolinguistics is a vast discipline that can be used to define numerous approaches to language study. Many linguists may self-identify as sociolinguists, yet sociolinguists may have wildly divergent research interests and data collection and analysis techniques. Sociolinguists research any of the subjects mentioned above. Sociolinguistics pays attention to differences in how individuals say things and differences in how people from other areas say things and tries to tie what they have seen to significant picture issues such as the belief that speakers who say the same thing in one way are brighter, more beautiful, or more trustworthy than speakers who say the same thing in another way.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Holmes (2001) added that sociolinguistics study tries to examine why people speak differently in different social contexts and how it is affected by social factors such as social distance, social status, age, gender, class on language varieties used. Sociolinguistics study also concerned with the identification that may result in different social functions of language and how language is used to convey social meanings. Trudgill cited in Jendra (2012: 10) mentions that sociolinguistics is part of linguistics which is concerned with language as a social and cultural phenomenon happened within the society.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Wardhaugh (2006:1) stated that language is what member of a particular society speak. Most Indonesian people are able to speak more than one language in their daily lives. There are more than 250 spoken languages in Indonesia besides Indonesian language is usually used besides their mother tongue, such as Chinese, Sundanese, Javanese, or many others. People intend to master more than one language and used them in communicating. Nowadays, many people mix Indonesian and English in their communication. In sociolinguistics, this phenomenon is called as code mixing.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Simply, code mixing could be defined as a situation when people mix more than one language in sentence or conversation. Code mixing is a widely observed phenomenon in multilingual and multicultural communities. Muysken (2000:1) explained that code mixing is the use of lexical items and grammatical features between two languages that appear in one sentence. In a bilingual or multilingual society, code mixing is likely to happen. Code mixing phenomenon occurs because each speaker has different language background. According Risdianto (2013:41) codemixing refers to the mixing of two or more languages or language varieties in speech and spoken language.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Code-mixing can be seen in spoken language. Code-mixing is also used in movies, videos, radio and so on. Movie or film is one of media to entertain and could be media to use the code mixing. Hornby (2000) stated that movie is a process of making or reproducing a motion picture. Movie as one of inspirations and reflections of reality in daily life or the real world could be a good example to explain a code-mixing phenomenon. Code mixing is also often used in several Indonesian movies, and one of the Indonesian comedy movies entitled “Cek Toko Sebelah”. It is interesting to know the types and the reason of the code-mixing that are used in that movie. Therefore, this study tried to analyze of code-mixing used in the one of the movies directed by Ernest Prakasa entitled “Cek Toko Sebelah”. This movie was chosen because the writer found</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 30 No.1</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">the use of more than one language, which are Bahasa Indonesia and English.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">In the era of globalization, mastering many languages is very important. Rohmani, et al. (2013:2) state that in the globalization era, global community is obligated to maximize their potential especially in language acquisition. Therefore, most people in the world use more than one language in everyday life. There have been many studies conducted to analyze at code mixing.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">First, Sipayung &amp;&nbsp;Maisuri (2017) in their study entitled The Analysis of Code Mixing in Film from Bandung with Love aimed to analyze the use of code mixing in a film enitled ‘From Bandung with Love’ uttered by the characters. The characters are used some types of code mixing. The sources of data were taken from the script of the film and they were divided into 35 scenes. Each scene consists of some utterances and then they are categorized based on the types of code mixing. The data are in forms of words or utterances used by all character of the film. The data was gathered by using documentary technique-the way to get information related to the data from textbook, newspaper, novel and film. The data were transcribed the whole sentences that uttered by the characters in the film. This study used the theory of code mixing proposed by Hoffman (1992). T\he result showed that: (1) there are three types of code mixing in the film, (2) the most type which has big effect is lexical code mixing, and (3) lexical code mixing as the dominant type shows that the teenagers in Indonesia like to mix their language per word to show that they are educated and modern.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Second, the study about code mixing also done by Setya (2016). The study investigated the types of code-mixing used in Marmut Merah Jambu movie and FLL students’ perception towards the use of code-mixing in Marmut Merah Jambu movie. The writer analyzed the English-Indonesian code mixing used in Marmut Merah Jambu movie. The aim of this study analyzed what is the most dominant code-mixing used in the movie: Marmut Merah Jambu using theoretical framework of Hoffman theory (1991): intra-</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">sentential code-mixing, intra-lexical code-mixing and code-mixing involving a change of pronunciation. This study also tried to investigate students’ perception, especially Faculty of Language and Literature (FLL) students in Satya Wacana Christian University (SWCU), toward the use of code-mixing in Marmut Merah Jambu movie The result reported that there are 133 occurrences of code-mixing in Marmut Merah Jambu movie, with the most occurred type involves the change of pronunciation (66.17 %), followed by intra-lexical code-mixing (30.08 %), and intra-sentential code-mixing (3.76 %).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Another previous research was written by Sihite (2016). In this research, the writer is going to analyze the English-Indonesian code mixing. The researcher relies on Fasold’s theory in analyzing the data. The writer used Suwito’s theory in classifying the types of code mixing and then the writer analyzed the factors influence of using code mixing and code switching by using Hofman’s and Saville-Troike’s theory. There were the insertion of word (29), the insertion of phrase (47), the insertion of hybrid (15), and the insertion of idiom (3). There were 2 types of code switching; metaphorical (6) and conversational code switching (112). The insertion of phrase has the biggest portion because there are so many English common terms which usually used when study English in English department. The total number of code mixing was 94 occurrences, meanwhile the total number of code-switching overall 118 occurrences. It can be concluded the lecturers tend to do code switching than code mixing.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The study written by Muljayati (2017) entitled in her study of code mixing in ‘Just Alvin Show’ at Metro TV identify 562 code mixing contexts that occurred. The research of the English-Indonesian code-switching in Just Alvin show used qualitative approach. The data in this study is oral conversations in Just Alvin show from January to December 2015. However, the samples that taken for this study only represented the entire shows and to determine the number of samples, the researcher used purposive sampling technique. This includes type of code mixing of insertion, alternation and</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 30 No.1</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">congruent lexicalization. Muljayati found that code mixing type of insertion is dominated by 348 speech (61.92%), followed by 203 speech of alternation (36.12%) and 11 speech of congruent lexicalization (1.96%). This previous study shows the speakers do insertion in mixed speech followed by alternation. While congruent lexicalization is the least occurs in conversation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Another study was conducted by Aziz, Diana &amp;&nbsp;Fadlun (2019) who study the used of code mixing in the Aplaus magazine. The method applied in this research was descriptive qualitative approach supported by simple statistic calculation (percentage) because the researchers described the types of Bahasa Indonesia – English code-mixing form in Aplaus magazine based on Musyken’s (2000) theory and looked for the most dominant type by comparing the highest percentages of each type. The data of this research were Bahasa Indonesia-English code mixing that were found in the Aplaus magazine on the Journey section. The data were obtained from several editions in some publications of the Aplaus magazine from April 2016 to August 2016 by using purposive sample technique. This technique means that the data were taken intentionally. The analysis showed that not all of three types of code mixing by Musyken (2000) were applicable in the Aplaus magazine, there are found 36 instances or about 76.6 % for insertion, 11 instances or about 23.4 % for alternation, and no case of congruent lexicalization. In this study shows the dominant type of code mixing used in the Aplaus magazine is also insertion.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Methods</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">This study conducted by using descriptive– qualitative method. Babbie (2014:303-304) states that qualitative research is a scientific method of observation to gather non-numerical data. According to Robert (2000:38) Qualitative method attempts to capture and understand individual definitions, descriptions, and meaning of events. Qualitative research produces narrative or textual descriptions of the phenomena under studies. This study is about descriptive qualitative method</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">because it described and analyzed the phenomena of the study in narrative description. The data of this study were in the form of utterances that contain types of code-mixing in a movie entitled </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Cek Toko Sebelah</span><span class="font3">. However, the dominant data of this study were the utterances of the main characters. The contexts of the data were the dialogues containing the types of code-mixing.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Denscombe (2007: 274) states that qualitative data need to be prepared and organized before they can be analyzed. The processes of data collection were as follows. First, the researcher downloaded and watched the movie </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Cek Toko Sebelah</span><span class="font3">. Second, the researcher looked for the script of the movie and rewatched the movie while reading the transcript of the dialogue whether what was spoken is the same as what was written. Then, the researcher collected the data from the script which followed the types of code-mixing. Last, the researcher put all the data into a data sheet and listed the data based on the category.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Bogdan and Biklen (1982: 145) state that the data analysis is working with the data which includes organizing, classifying, synthesizing, understanding the data, and determining the data that will be presented. In according that definition, the researcher take the procedures of data analysis in this study were as follows, First, the data that have been collected were classified based on the types of the code mixing used by the characters in the Indonesian movie </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Cek Toko Sebelah</span><span class="font3">. After that, the collected were analyzed based on the reasons use code mixing with more detailed use S.P.E.A.K.I.N.G analysis by Dell Hymes. Last, the conclusion were thaken based on the analysis that have been conducted.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Result and Discussion</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">In the analysis, the researcher classified the data based on the types of code mixing and its explanation. The researcher did not show all the cases which are found but shows some cases for each types because there are many data which have the same models. Based on the data, the analysis of the use of code mixing in the Indonesian movie </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Cek Toko Sebelah</span><span class="font3"> could be explained as follows.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 30 No.1</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>Utterance 1</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">“</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Yah dijaga aja kondisinya, jangan sampe capek jangan </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">stress</span><span class="font3">.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Definition: The word ‘stress’ is condition when the body reacts to these changes with physical, mental and emotional responses. The type of code mixing in that utterance is congruent lexicalizations code mixing because that are sharing a language grammatical structure in Indonesian people say ‘stress’ with the same phonological ‘stress’ in English in medical term and ‘stress’ is popular word used in Indonesian language.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Setting: This utterance took place in the hospital, participant: the doctor, ends: report, act: complete sentence and direct sentence, key: The doctor report with slowly and try to calm down the ambience. Instrument: used oral pathway, norm: nice, complete and giving advice to take care, Genre: dialogue and giving report.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The utterances take places in the room of hospital. The speaker of the utterance is the doctor and the hearer is Yohan. The doctor and Yohan talks with direct speech and oral pathway and he used complete sentences and direct sentences. The doctor is very nice and giving good advice. He says that utterance in informal situation. Stress is condition when the body reacts to these changes with physical, mental and emotional responses. Indonesian people say “Stress” with the same phonological “Stress” in English in medical term. The speakers cannot find the words that have similar meanings. That the reasons why that utterance belongs to need filling motive.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>Utterance 2.</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">“</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Ini, baru juga dua. Tapi gua beneran pengen </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">diet </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">kok</span><span class="font3">.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Setting: in the living room of Aming’s house, participant: Aming, ends: give explain, act: complete sentence and direct sentence, key: Aming talks with seriously and relax, Instrument: used oral pathway, norm: nice, informal language, Genre: dialogue. The word ‘diet’ is the sum of food</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">consumed by persons or other organism or intake of nutrition for health or weight management reasons. The type of code mixing in that utterance is congruent lexicalizations code mixing because it was sharing a language grammatical structure in Indonesian people say ‘diet’ with the same phonological ‘diet’ in English.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The utterances take places in the living room of Aming’s house. The speaker of the utterance is Aming. Aming talks with direct speech and oral pathway and he used complete sentences and direct sentences. Aming is very nice guy and make a laugh. He says that utterance in informal situation. Diet is the sum of food consumed by persons or other organism or intake of nutrition for health or weight management reasons. Indonesian people say ‘diet’ with the same phonological ‘diet’ in English. That the reasons why that utterance belongs to need filling motive.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>Utterance 3.</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">“</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Aku jadi kandidat buat di promoin ke </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">General office</span><span class="font3">.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Setting: in restaurant, participant: Erwin, ends: give explain, act: complete sentence and direct sentence, key: Erwin talks with friendly and good manners, Instrument: used oral pathway, norm: nice, informal language and good manners Genre: dialogue. The type of that code mixing is insertion because general office is just single phrase borrowing or insert in single utterance without change the topic. General office is English language which inserted in clause of Indonesian language as adverb. General office is noun phrase. General office is insertion of phrase that consists of two words. It concludes noun phrase that explain some position in office.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The utterance takes place in restaurant. The speaker of the utterance is Erwin. Erwin talks with direct speech and oral pathway and he used complete sentences and direct sentences. Erwin is very nice guy and hard worker. He says that utterance in informal situation. General office is prestige filling motive because the speaker alternated his utterance. The speaker can speak</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 30 No.1</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">English well so he mixes his language. It means, he wants to give prestige from to others person. Actually, it can use Indonesian utterance ‘</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">pemimpin perusahaan</span><span class="font3">’ and that is the reason why that utterance belongs to prestige filling motive.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>Utterance 4.</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">“</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Udah kamu pesen dulu, </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">lunch break is almost over</span><span class="font3">.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Setting: in restaurant, participant: Nattalie, ends: give explain, act: complete sentence and direct sentence, key: Nattalie talks with friendly and good manners, Instrument: used oral pathway, norm: nice, informal language and good manners Genre: dialogue. The clause ‘lunch break is almost over’ is independent clause. The type of that code mixing is alternation because structures of two languages are alternated speaker mixes his or her language with a clause. The speaker mixes from Indonesia language ‘</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">udah kamu pesen dulu</span><span class="font3">’ and proceed by English language clause “lunch break is almost over” in single utterance.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The utterance takes place in restaurant. The speaker of the utterance is Nattalie. Nattalie talks with direct speech and oral pathway and she used complete sentences and direct sentences. Nattalie is little bit under estimate and little bit believe with someone. She says that utterance in informal situation. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Lunch break is almost over</span><span class="font3"> is prestige filling motive because the speaker alternated her utterance. The speaker can speak English well so she mixes his language. It means, he want to give prestige from to other person. Actually, it can use Indonesian utterance ‘</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">istirahat makan siang hampir selesai</span><span class="font3">’ and that is the reason why that utterance belongs to prestige filling motive.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>Utterance 5.</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">“</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Apa ya? Kamu tuh suka </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">over confidence</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">, Win. Saya tau kamu pede karna kamu yakin bener, tapi...orang ngeliatnya, kayak kamu sombong </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">be humble</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">, Win</span><span class="font3">.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Setting: in office room of Mrs. Sonya, participant: Mrs. Sonya, ends: give explain, act:</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">complete sentence and direct sentence, key: Mrs. Sonya talks with friendly and good manners, Instrument: used oral pathway, norm: nice, informal language and good manners Genre: dialogue. The type of that code mixing is insertion because ‘over confidence’ and ‘be humble’ are just a single phrase borrowing or insert in single utterance without change the topic.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The utterance takes place in office room of Mrs. Sonya. The speaker of the utterance is Mrs. Sonya. Mrs. Sonya talks with direct speech and oral pathway and she used complete sentences and direct sentences. Mrs. Sonya is funny person and good boss. She says that utterance in informal situation. Over confidence and be humble are prestige filling motive because the speaker alternated her utterance. The speaker can speak English well so she mixes his language. It means, he want to give prestige from to other person. Actually, it can use Indonesian utterance and that is the reason why that utterance belongs to prestige filling motive.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conslusion</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Code mixing is a conversation using two or more languages without change the situation in one speech. In this research, the researcher finds the characters of Cek Toko Sebelah movie employ code mixing by insertion, alternation, and congruent lexicalization linguistic element of English into Indonesian in their sentence. The researcher finds the use of code mixing occurred when the characters speak to another character with variation topic. The differences background of the characters are the reasons of mixing code by the characters such as need filling motive and prestige filling motive. Based on the data analysis, the researcher finds conclusion there are as follows. Tthere are three types of code mixing used in the Indonesian movie </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Cek Toko Sebelah</span><span class="font3">; insertion code mixing, alteration code mixing, and congruent lexicalization code mixing. Moreober, there are two motives of using code mixing used in the Indonesian movie </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Cek Toko Sebelah</span><span class="font3">: need filling motive and prestige filling motive.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 30 No.1</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;References</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Azhar, I.N. 2012. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Sosiolinguistik Teori dan Praktek</span><span class="font3">. Surabaya: Lima-Lima Jaya</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Aziz, Zulfadi A., Achmad, Diana &amp;&nbsp;Fadlun, Maizura. 2019. &quot;An Investigation of Code Mixing in a Magazine&quot;. English Education Journal. Vol 1 No. 2</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Babbie, Earl, 2014. The Basics of Social Research (Sixth edition Ed.). Belmont, Calif.: Wadsworth Cengage.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Chaer, A., &amp;&nbsp;Agustina, L. 2004, Sosiolinguistik: Perkenalan Awal, Jakarta. Rineka Cipta.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">__________________. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;2010. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Sosiolinguistik:</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Perkenalan awal (Revisi). Jakarta: Rineka Cipta.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Denzin, Norman K. and Lincoln, Yvonne S. 2000. Handbook of Qualitative &nbsp;Research</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Second Edition. London: Sage.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Farahsani, Y., Rini, I.P., &amp;&nbsp;jaya, P.H. 2019. CodeMixing In Dialogues </span><span class="font1">a</span><span class="font3">s Seen </span><span class="font1">i</span><span class="font3">n Alice Comic </span><span class="font1">b</span><span class="font3">y Angellina. Jurnal Humanika Vol. 26, No. 2, 2019.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Fishman, J.A. 1972. The Sosiology of Language.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Cambridge: Newbury.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Gardner-Chloros, Penelope. 2009. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Code-Switching</span><span class="font3">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Cambridge Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Geeslin, Kimberly. 2022. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">The Routledge Handbook of Second Language Acquisition and Sociolinguistics</span><span class="font3">. London and New York: Routledge.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Hudson, R. A. 1994. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Sociolinguistic</span><span class="font3">s. Cambridge: Cambridge Press</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Hymes, Dell. 1974. Foundations of Sociolinguistics: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;An Ethnographic</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Approach. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">______________. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;1977, Foundation in Sociolinguistics: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;An Ethnography</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Approach London: Longman.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">______________. &nbsp;2011. Introduction: Toward Ethnographies &nbsp;&nbsp;of Communication.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">American Anthropologist, New Series.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Inayah, K. A. 2009. &nbsp;About The Simple</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Conversation. Bandung.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Kaddour, Noor Al &amp;&nbsp;Kaddoura, R. 2019. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">The Use of Code-Switching and Code-Mixing by Speakers of Emirati Arabic (EA)</span><span class="font3">. Jornal of Literature, Language and Linguistics. Vol. 52.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Mayerhoff, Miriam. 2018. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Introducing Sociolinguistics.</span><span class="font3"> Third Edition. London &nbsp;&nbsp;and &nbsp;&nbsp;New &nbsp;&nbsp;York:</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Routledge.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Muljayati, Enggar. 2017. &quot;The Indonesian-English Code Mixing in 'Just Alvin Show' at Metro TV. Journal of English Language &amp;&nbsp;Culture: Prodi Bahasa dan Budaya Inggris. Vol 7 No. 2.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Poeste, M., Muller, N., &amp;&nbsp;Gil, L.A. 2019. CodeMixing and Language Dominance: Bilingual, Trilingual and Multilingual Children Compared. International Journal of Multilingualism. DOI: 10.1080/14790718.2019.1569017</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Poudel, Sagar. 2019. Code-Mixing and Literal Translation in Nepal’s English Newspaper. Journal of NELTA, Vol. 24 No. 1—2, November 2019.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Sipayung, Elisabet &amp;&nbsp;Meisuri. 2013. “The Analysis of Code Mixing in Film ‘From Bandung with Love’. Linguistica: Journal of Lingusitcs of FBS UNIMED. Vol 2, No. 1</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">van Herk, Gerald. 2018. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">What is Sociolinguistics</span><span class="font3">. Second Edition. Hoboken: &nbsp;&nbsp;Wiley</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Blackwell.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Wardhaugh, R. 2010. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">An Introduction to Sociolinguistics (6th Ed.)</span><span class="font3">. Oxford, UK: Wiley-Blackwell.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Wardhaugh, R. and Fuller, Janet M. 2015. An Introduction to Sociolinguistics. Seventh Edition. Oxford: Wiley Blackwell.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">7</span></p>