---
layout: full_article
title: "The IMMUNOMODULATORY  EFFECT OF ENDURANCE EXERCISE (EE) AND RESISTANCE EXERCISE (RE) THROUGH THE KYNURENINE PATHWAY IN HEALTHY AND CANCER SUBJECT"
author: "Sienny Muliaty Sumali, Marta Wangsadinata Wong, Ireene Hillary Artauli Sinurat, Indira  Vidiari Juhanna, I Putu Adiartha Griadhi"
categories: sport
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/sport/full-100337 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/sport/id-100337"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/sport/full-100337"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Sport and Fitness Journal</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Volume 11, No.2, May 2023: 137-152</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">E-ISSN: 2654-9182</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>THE IMMUNOMODULATORY EFFECT OF ENDURANCE EXERCISE (EE) AND RESISTANCE EXERCISE (RE) ON HEALTHY AND CANCER SUBJECT THROUGH THE KYNURENINE PATHWAY</span></h1>
<p><span class="font4">Sienny Muliaty Sumali<sup>1</sup>*, Marta Wangsadinata Wong <sup>2</sup>, Ireene Hillary Artauli Sinurat <sup>3</sup>, Indira Vidiari Juhanna <sup>4</sup>, I Putu Adiartha Griadhi <sup>5</sup></span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4"><sup>1</sup> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Biomedicine Antiaging Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Universitas Udayana, 80234, Denpasar, Indonesia</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4"><sup>2</sup> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Biomedicine Antiaging Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Universitas Udayana, 80234, Denpasar, Indonesia</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4"><sup>3</sup> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Biomedicine Antiaging Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Universitas Udayana, 80234, Denpasar, Indonesia</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4"><sup>4</sup> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Physiology Department, Faculty of Medicine, Universitas Udayana, 80234, Denpasar, Indonesia</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4"><sup>5</sup> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Physiology Department, Faculty of Medicine, Universitas Udayana, 80234, Denpasar, Indonesia</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Email: </span><a href="mailto:shiennysumali86@gmail.com"><span class="font4">shiennysumali86@gmail.com</span></a></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>ABSTRACT</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">The kynurenine pathway breaks down tryptophan, an amino acid found in many foods, producing kynurenine that affects the immune system. Acute and resistance exercise modify this pathway, enhancing immune function by influencing immune cell mediators. This literature review explores the effects of exercise on the kynurenine pathway and immune system, summarizing ten clinical trials. Findings indicate that exercise impacts the pathway and immune system. Three studies show that acute and chronic endurance training increases kyn clearance and reduces kynurenine levels in healthy individuals. Two studies demonstrate that cancer patients can modify their immune systems by decreasing kynurenine levels and adjusting the kynurenine-tryptophan ratio. However, one study shows no impact on kynurenine levels in depressed patients undergoing endurance and strength training. Another study observed increased kynurenine levels and the kynurenine-tryptophan ratio. Additionally, a study reveals that both endurance and resistance exercise elevate CD3+ lymphocyte expression and PD-1+ CD8+ T-cells in the short term. By modulating immune cell mediators, exercise influences the kynurenine pathway, improving immune function. Exercise therapies can decrease kynurenine and increase tryptophan and kynurenic acid in cancer patients, enhancing immune function and reducing inflammation. This research suggests that exercise serves as a non-pharmacological intervention to prevent chronic diseases associated with inflammation and immune dysfunction.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Keywords: exercise; adult; healthy; cancer; kynurenine; immunomodulatory; innate immune system; adaptive immune system</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>INTRODUCTION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">As of 2020, slightly more than 1 billion individuals are 60 or older, accounting for 13.5% of the world's total population of 7.8 billion. Since 1980, when the figure was only 382 million, it has climbed 2.5 times. The number of elderly people is expected to reach about 2.1 billion by the year 2050.(1) The aging population has contributed to an increase in the prevalence of age-related infectious illnesses and cancer, which can be traced in part to the natural reduction in immune system function known as &quot;immunosenescence.&quot; Immunosenescence is a syndrome in which the immune system deteriorates as a</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">result of age, causing alterations in both innate and adaptive immunity. This degradation impacts immune cell function and features, including the expression and activity of immune cell receptors, resulting in a loss of immunological function such as chemotaxis and intracellular death. These alterations, in turn, weaken the body's response to pathogens, raising the risk of age-related disorders like cardiovascular disease, Alzheimer's disease, and diabetes. Furthermore, an aging immune system creates a pro-inflammatory milieu, which raises the likelihood of persistent infections and autoimmune illnesses, ultimately contributing to biological aging.(2)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Immunosenescence, also known as immunopause, is a complex aging phenomena involving numerous variables and biological events. These events include a decrease in both humoral and cellular immunity, an increase in the background of inflammation and oxidation, known as inflammaging and oxi-inflammaging, and the generation and release of auto-antibodies, which can contribute to the development of autoimmune illnesses.(3) Increasing exercise, according to some studies, may be an effective method for reducing chronic inflammation in older people.(4)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The kynurenine pathway, which yields multiple physiologically active chemicals, is the principal route by which tryptophan is broken down. While protein synthesis and serotonin/melatonin production only require trace amounts of tryptophan, the kynurenine pathway catabolizes more than 90% of the important amino acid.(5)(6) The first bioactive metabolite produced along this pathway is kynurenine (Kyn), and subsequent metabolites have shown the ability to affect both the immunological and central neurological systems.(7)(8) Certain gut bacteria have the ability to alter the host's serotonin production in enterochromaffin cells, and some can transfer serotonin to the host, potentially boosting inflammation and influencing neutrophil activity. (9)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Acute and chronic exercise both impact the regulation of the KYN pathway. Human evidence on the effects of chronic exercise on the KYN pathway, on the other hand, is conflicting, with many studies revealing no significant impact on circulating metabolites due to low training frequency intensity ratio or a lack of information on exercise modalities and adherence.(10)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">In healthy individuals, the kynurenine pathway involves enzymes called tryptophan 2,3-dioxygenase (TDO) and indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase (IDO) 1 and 2. TDO is mainly found in the liver and is stimulated by tryptophan or glucocorticoids. On the other hand, IDO can be found in various human cells. IDO1 and IDO2 have different expression levels, effects on metabolites, and enzyme activity based on specific physiological conditions. The role of IDO2 is not well understood yet. IDO activity is closely linked to the immune system, and peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) are known to produce IDO. Under normal conditions, TDO is responsible for most of the conversion of tryptophan to kynurenine (KYN) for immune homeostasis. However, inflammatory stimuli cause a significant increase in IDO1-mediated conversion, especially when levels of interferon-gamma (IFN-y) and other pro-inflammatory cytokines like interleukin-6 (IL-6) and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α are elevated. KYN itself has immunomodulatory effects, including suppression of cytotoxic T-cell and NK-cell activity, as well as the differentiation of regulatory T-cells (Tregs). The IDO1-mediated conversion to KYN activates the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR), which plays a role in T-cell differentiation. Chronic inflammation leads to a decrease in available tryptophan, which is essential for serotonin synthesis, resulting in impaired serotonin production. (11)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Whereas the kynurenine pathway in cancer influenced by factors like cortisol levels and inflammation, and it plays a role in immune function, energy metabolism, and inflammation regulation. &quot;Immune privilege&quot; refers to the inhibition of inflammatory reactions. The kynurenine pathway is involved in maintaining immune privilege by regulating local and systemic responses to reduce inflammation. This pathway is also important in immune escape in cancer. The pathway generates tolerance in immune-privileged sites and tumor microenvironments. It plays a role in generating regulatory T cells (Tregs) and can be triggered by tumor cell cytokines and chemokines. The four main mechanisms of the kynurenine pathway in regulating the immune response are tryptophan depletion, activation of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR), induction of Tregs, and blocking IL-2 through kynurenine. Other factors implicated in immunological tolerance include PD-1/PD-L1 expression in tumor cells and macrophage MIF expression.(12)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The kynurenine pathway has been linked to various chronic diseases and may serve as a therapeutic target. Exercise, especially endurance and resistance training, can modulate the kynurenine pathway and influence immune function by affecting the production and clearance of kynurenine metabolites. However, further research is needed to fully understand the effects of exercise on the kynurenine pathway and its implications for health and disease.After discovering that skeletal muscle is primarily responsible for the exercise-induced increase in KynA.(13) Researchers conducted further studies to investigate whether KynA has the potential to act as a myokine. These investigations found that increasing KynA to post-exercise levels in mice on a daily basis for 1 to 4 weeks resulted in weight loss due to decreased adiposity. When mice were given KynA, the immune cell makeup in adipose tissue changed, resulting in a shift to a more anti-inflammatory phenotype. These effects were mediated by GPR35 signaling (described further below) and subsequent PGC-1 overexpression. GPR35 mutant mice were not responsive to KynA- or exercise-induced browning of adipose tissue, confirming KynA's role as an exercise-induced myokine that influences systemic energy expenditure and immune system regulation. Other KPM receptors are present in diverse peripheral organs, indicating that other KPMs may also act as myokines. (14)(15)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The period of sample collection should be carefully examined when assessing the effects of acute or chronic exercise on the KYN pathway. Acute exercise samples should be collected shortly after activity and throughout recovery to show result kinetics, whereas chronic exercise samples should be collected in a resting state, usually 24 hours or longer after the last exercise session. Incomplete recovery and adaption mechanisms following acute exercise, on the other hand, could potentially skew the outcomes of chronic exercise, resulting in no apparent effects.(16)(17)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This review summarizes known research on the effects of KP on immunological regulation. Following a brief description of the pathway's metabolites and enzymes, we summarize findings that suggest linkages between KP and immune function in exercised cancer and healthy subjects.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>METHODS</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">The search process involved using electronic databases such as Web of NCBI PubMed to identify published journal articles that explored the role of emotions in eating disorders (EDs). The search was limited to articles published between 2013 and 2022, and it was updated in March 2023. The search terms used were based on three categories: kynurenine, exercise, immune, endurance exercise, resistance exercise, health cancer,and adult. These categories were combined using &quot;OR&quot; and &quot;AND&quot; operators, and truncation was applied to key terms. Additionally, the reference lists of obtained full-text articles were examined for potentially relevant articles. The systematic literature search followed the PRISMA guidelines, as well as the guidelines from the Evidence for Policy and Practice Centre (EPPI-Centre, 2008).</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>RESULTS</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">Three studies show that exercise influences the kynurenine pathway and immunological function. Acute and continuous endurance training in healthy people resulted in reduced kynurenin levels and increased kynurenine clearance. (18)(19) Patients with cancer can modify their immune systems by lowering kyn levels and lowering the kyn/trp ratio with acute and chronic resistance exercise.(20)(21) Meanwhile, Millischer found no difference in kyn levels in depression patients who received acute and chronic endurance and strength training. While on older healthy women who underwent acute endurance activity, kyn levels and the kynurenine tryptophan ratio increased. Furthermore, one study concentrated on the acute effects of endurance and resistance exercise on the immune system without particularly assessing kynurenine pathway metabolites. It was discovered, however, that both types of exercise boosted the expression of CD3+ lymphocytes after both EE and RE, as well as an increase in PD-1+ CD8+ T-cells after EE. Only after EE did the proportions of T-cell populations change.(22)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Table 1. Endurance exercise (EE) and resistance exercise (RE) related to kynurenine and immune system</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">No. &nbsp;&nbsp;Reference</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Method &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Type of &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Effect to Kynurenine &nbsp;Effect on</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Exercise &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Pathway &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;immune cell</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font3">Joisten et. al</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">(2020) (22)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">Healthy male adults &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Endurance &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;There was a &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The ratio of</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">completed both a &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;exercise (EE) and &nbsp;substantial time effect &nbsp;KYN to TRP</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">resistance exercise (RE) &nbsp;resistance &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;<sup>on KYN</sup>/<sup>TRP rat</sup>i<sup>o</sup> i<sup>n</sup></span></p>
<p><span class="font3">and an acute endurance &nbsp;&nbsp;exercise (RE). &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;<sup>RE EE following</sup> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;IL-6 (+)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">exercise (EE) session. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;<sup>exercise, there was an</sup> &nbsp;&nbsp;CD56 (+)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Blood samples were &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;<sup>increase in KA and</sup> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;NK-cells, (+)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">KA/KYN ratio, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;<sup>,</sup></span></p>
<p><span class="font3">obtained before, shortly followed by a</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">after, and one hour after &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;cytotoxic T-cells</span></p>
<p><span class="font3"><sup>,</sup> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;reduction in the</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">the completion of each &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;<sub>follow-up</sub> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;(-) CD56dim (-)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">exercise session. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;<sub>measurement.</sub> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;NK cells. (-)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Estimated ratios and &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;<sub>KAT4 expression</sub></span></p>
<p><span class="font3">serum concentrations of &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;<sub>increased following</sub></span></p>
<p><span class="font3">TRP, KYN, kynurenic &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;<sub>EE exercise, and</sub> Q<sub>A</sub></span></p>
<p><span class="font3"><sup>acid (KA), and</sup> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;levels were higher</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">quinolinic acid (QA) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;<sub>after the EE session.</sub></span></p>
<p><span class="font3">were among the results.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The gene expression of indoleamine 2,3 dioxygenase (IDO) 1 and kynurenine aminotransferase (KAT) 4 was examined in this work. PBMCs are also known as peripheral blood mononuclear cells.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Cortisol and Interleukin (IL)-6 serum concentrations were also examined, as these are two potential KYN pathway mediators.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This study looked at the early correlations between immune cell types, potential mediators, and results of the KYN pathway's initial activation.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font3">Saran et.al</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">(2021) (19)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">The study involved 35 &nbsp;&nbsp;bicycle &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The presence of &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Not measured</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Caucasian adults (25 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;cycloergometer &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;kynurenine</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">women and 10 men) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;(Endurance &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;aminotransferase</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">who were not frequent &nbsp;&nbsp;Exercise) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;(KAT) activity in</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">exercisers. The &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;sweat samples.</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font3">participants' mean age was 47.62 years (SD15.91), and their mean Body Mass Index (BMI) was 24.36 kg/m2 (SD3.29).</span></p>
<div>
<p><span class="font3">Indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase (IDO) and tryptophan 2,3-dioxygenase (TDO) activity was considerably decreased.</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<p><span class="font3">Under medical supervision, the participants completed a four-week daily exercise program, except on Saturdays and Sundays. The regimen included two periods of cycloergometer training, followed by elliptical cross-trainer movements.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Training on each device was gradually increased over four weeks, from eight minutes in the first week to 15 minutes in the third and fourth weeks, with no breaks longer than 30 seconds between exercises. The exercise intensity was low, and the activities were carried out in an air-conditioned gymnasium at a temperature of 2324°C.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Sweat samples were obtained on days one, fourteen, and twentyeight of the training using two separate ways to account for potential mistakes due to sweat collecting method specificity. Method A involves applying a commercial absorbent patch (Pharm</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">Chem Inc., USA) between the shoulder blades before beginning the training session and removing it immediately after finishing the daily workout. Method B entailed taking a sweat sample (a drop of perspiration) from the patient's forehead with a cotton wool swab immediately after the daily training was completed.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font3">Zimmer et.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">al (2019)(23)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">A study comprised 96 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Resistance &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Serum KYN levels &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Not measured</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">breast cancer patients &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Exercise (RE) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;were significantly</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">who had not received &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;lower and the</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">chemotherapy. They &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;KYN/TRP ratio was</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">were randomly &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;lower in exercisers</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">allocated to one of two &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;than in non-exercisers</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">groups: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;(CG).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">exercise/intervention (IG) or control (CG).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">For 12 weeks, the IG followed a supervised progressive resistance training program twice a week, while the CG followed a supervised relaxation program.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">TRP and KYN levels in the blood, as well as KYNA and neurotoxic QUINA levels in the urine, were measured before (t0), after radiation, at mid-term of the exercise intervention (t1), and after the exercise intervention (t2). 24 healthy women (HIG) also participated in the exercise program to examine potential differences in the</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">impact on KYN metabolites between breast cancer patients and healthy individuals.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">4 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font3">Pal et.al</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">(2020) (24)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Following a &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Endurance &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Chronic and acute EE &nbsp;&nbsp;Chronic and</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">cardiopulmonary &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Exercise (EE) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;have the capacity to &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;acute EE</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">exercise test (CPET), &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;suppress the AhR/IDO &nbsp;activate NK</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">21 adult patients with &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;axis. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;cells</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">breast and prostate &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;cytotoxicity.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">cancer were randomly randomized to 12-week intervention programs of endurance standard training or endurance polarized training. Serum was taken before CPET, immediately after CPET, one hour after CPET, and 12 weeks after the intervention. Flow cytometry was used to look for AhR, IDO, KIR2DL1, and NKG2D in NK-92 cells that had been treated with autologous serum. For acute impacts, analysis of variance was employed, while for chronic effects, analysis of covariance was used.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">5 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font3">Pal et. al</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">(2020) (20)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">The trial comprised 65 &nbsp;&nbsp;Resistance &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Reduce &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;IL-6 levels</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">adult pancreatic cancer &nbsp;&nbsp;Exercise (RE) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;kynurenine/tryptophan &nbsp;decreased over</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">patients shortly after &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;l<sup>eve</sup>l<sup>s</sup> (i<sup>n</sup>di<sup>cat</sup>i<sup>ve o</sup>f &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;the first three</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">resection, and the &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;<sup>IDO/TDO enzyme),</sup> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;months for</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">intervention phase &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;<sup>hence regulating the</sup> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;both</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">lasted 6 months, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;<sup>immune system</sup> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;intervention</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">beginning 12 weeks &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;groups.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">after surgery with resistance training twice a week. Except for one patient who did not have surgery, the baseline (t0) was acquired at this point, and training began</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">immediately following randomization.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">6 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font3">Schenk et.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">al (2020)(21)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">In this study, 24 healthy Endurance &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;RE &amp;&nbsp;EE:</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">males (age: 24.63.9 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;exercise (EE) and &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;increase in</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">years; weight: 83.910.5 &nbsp;&nbsp;resistance &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;C<sup>D3+</sup></span></p>
<p><span class="font3">kg; height: 182.46.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;exercise (RE) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;<sup>decreased</sup></span></p>
<p><span class="font3">cm) did a single bout of &nbsp;session. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;<sup>cytoplasmic</sup></span></p>
<p><span class="font3">both resistance and &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;<sup>AhR</sup></span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Decrease PD-1+ endurance exercise on</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">EE: increase in consecutive days in a randomly assigned order. Blood was drawn before (t0), after (t1), and one hour after (t2) in both circumstances.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Flow cytometry was used to assess T-cell populations, cytoplasmic AhR content, and surface PD-1.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">8 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Strasser et.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">al (2016)(18)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3">This study included 33 &nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font1">&quot;Light exercise&quot; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font3">Tryptophan &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Neopterin</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">healthy and trained &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font1">(yoga-like &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font3">concentrations were &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;concentrations</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">athletes who met &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font1"><sub>c</sub>l<sub>asses</sub>)<sub>,</sub> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font3">reduced while &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;increased</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">certain requirements &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font1"><sub>&quot;moderate</sub> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font3">kynurenine levels &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;considerably</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">such as having no &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font1"><sub>exercise&quot;</sub> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font3">increased &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;after exercise,</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">history of muscle &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font1"><sub>(intermediate-</sub> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font3">indicating</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">condition, cardiac or &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font1"><sub>level aerobics</sub> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font3">immunological</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">kidney disease, not &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;activation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3"><sup>,</sup> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font1">class), and</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">taking any medication, and not drinking &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font0"><sup>v gorous</sup> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font3">IFN-y</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">alcohol on a regular &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font0"><sup>exercise ( ig -</sup> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font3">participation is</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">basis. Each participant &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font0"><sup>intensity</sup> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font3">supported.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">completed a &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font0"><sup>aerobics/strength</sup> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font3">Furthermore,</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">questionnaire detailing &nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font0"><sup>training) are the</sup> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font3">exercise boosted</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">their medical history &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font0"><sup>three levels of</sup> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font3">macrophage</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">and prior training. In &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font1">exercise. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font3">IDO1 activity.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">this study, the eligible people (17 women and 16 men) had endurance training, which included continuous endurance training at moderate intensity (60% to 80% peak oxygen consumption) done each week in the month before the test.</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">Two hours before the exercise test, the participants were given a standardized breakfast that included an incremental cycle ergometer exercise.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">10 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font3">Joinsten</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">et.al (2020) (21)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">The study comprised 12 &nbsp;Resistance &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;According to the &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Not measured</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">healthy individuals &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Exercise (RE) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;findings, acute HYP</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">aged 19 to 32 who &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;<sup>exerc</sup>i<sup>se,</sup> b<sup>ut not</sup></span></p>
<p><span class="font3">frequently engaged in &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;<sup>MAX exercise,</sup></span></p>
<p><span class="font3">strength training. To &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;<sup>temporarily increases</sup></span></p>
<p><span class="font3"><sub>establish good</sub> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;the flow of the KYN</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">route towards KA. movement control and</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This may result in</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">a homogeneous sample, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;<sub>peripheral KYN</sub></span></p>
<p><span class="font3">participants were asked &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;<sub>elimination and</sub></span></p>
<p><span class="font3">to undertake at least &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;<sub>immunomodulatory</sub></span></p>
<p><span class="font3">one strength training &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;<sub>e</sub>ff<sub>ects.</sub></span></p>
<p><span class="font3">session per week for the previous 6 months.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The researchers took blood samples from individuals three times: before (T0), immediately after (T1), and one hour after (T2) completing two different types of loadings (HYP and MAX) in a randomized cross-over design. The serum concentrations of tryptophan (TRP), KYN, kynurenic acid (KA), and quinolinic acid (QA) were determined using high-performance liquid chromatography.</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>DISCUSSION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">Exercise has been shown to benefit the immune system by improving immunological function and decreasing inflammation. Exercise has also been linked to changes in the kynurenine pathway. The</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">examined literature sheds light on the effects of acute and chronic exercise on kynurenine (kyn) levels and clearance in healthy individuals as well as cancer and depressed patients. In healthy people, acute and chronic endurance and resistance training were observed to promote kyn clearance and decrease kyn levels (Schenk and Joinsten). These were also discovered in healthy patients who performed acute endurance training, which was related with a fall in trp levels and an increase in kyn levels, implying an increase in trp catabolism (strasser, saran). Patients with cancer who received chronic resistance training had lower kyn levels and a lower kyn/trp ratio (Pal, Zimmer), indicating that resistance training may be an effective strategy to modify the immune system in cancer patients. This is consistent with previous research findings. Overexpression of IDO1 is related with poor patient survival in cancer patients, and phase III clinical trials using the IDO1 inhibitor Epacadostat indicate promising outcomes.(9)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Oncological research indicates one possible explanation for the link between exercise and antiinflammatory benefits. According to research, tumor cells have higher activation of the kynurenine (KYN) pathway, which degrades tryptophan (TRP). Inflammatory signaling activates indoleamine-2,3-dioxygenase 1 (IDO1), the first enzyme in the KYN pathway, which converts TRP to KYN. KYN modulates the immune system and promotes Treg differentiation.Acute exercise has been shown in studies to robustly activate the KYN pathway, which may contribute to its anti-inflammatory effects in the short term. (25) The first activation of the KYN pathway following acute exercise is most likely caused by immunological activation caused by an increase in inflammatory cytokines such as IL-6. The activation of IDO1, IDO2, and KMO by IFN- and other inflammatory cytokines such as IL-6 significantly relates to the upregulation of the KYN pathway via IDO, resulting in enhanced breakdown of KYN to QA during acute exercise. Exercise's effect on nitric oxide and its possible function in suppressing IDO activity, resulting in persistent downregulation of the KYN pathway.(26)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Aside from suppressing IDO activity, the increase in metabolic flux towards KA following acute and chronic exercise may be connected to KAT expression in various tissues or cell types. Although the degradation of KYN to KA has primarily been examined in the setting of chronic exercise.(27) PGC-1 coactivator-mediated increases in KAT expression in skeletal muscle were accompanied by a decrease in KYN in blood plasma, according to the findings. PGC-1 has been shown to increase in skeletal muscle following both single bouts of aerobic exercise and continuous exercise training. It could account for the observed abrupt increase in metabolic flow towards KA. PGC-1 relies on DNA-binding transcription factors known as the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR) family as a transcriptional coactivator. In skeletal muscle, PPAR- and PPAR- are tightly connected with PGC-11, whereas PPAR- is mostly expressed in immune cells and modulates certain immune response pathways. Because PPAR expression is ligand-dependent and some of these ligands can be generated by exercise stimuli, the PPAR family may play a crucial role in PGC-11-mediated KAT expression in response to acute exercise in skeletal muscle as well as other tissues. Although only peripheral mononuclear immune cells showed enhanced KAT enzyme expression after acute exercise, more study into KAT enzyme expression in skeletal muscle is needed. Acute resistance exercise may also be associated to the PGC-14 isoform, which has been linked to skeletal muscle hypertrophy regulation and resistance training. Long-term anti-inflammatory effects of exercise can be achieved in two ways. For starters, it can reduce the amount of visceral fat, which is a major source of inflammation. Second, frequent exercise can improve the body's overall ability to resist inflammation.(28)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Skeletal muscle, which is an important part of the locomotor system and accounts for a large fraction of lean body mass (up to 40%), is important for glucose uptake after meals and for maintaining body temperature. (30)It also provides amino acids, which are utilized by several organs during critical conditions.Exercise can change the composition and function of skeletal muscle, resulting in a variety of health advantages that go beyond energy homeostasis. Skeletal muscle is becoming recognized as an endocrine organ that produces myokines, which can affect metabolism, inflammation, and cell proliferation in a variety of ways.(28)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Large neutral amino acid transporters (LATs) in muscle fibers carry Kyn and Trp, competing with other amino acids. (34) LAT inhibition has been demonstrated to lower Kyn and KynA concentrations in the muscles. In skeletal muscles, LAT1 and LAT2 form heterodimer complexes with CD98, with type 2</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">fibers carrying more LAT1 than type 1 fibers.(29) LAT1 and CD98 expression rises in response to acute resistance exercise in both young and old persons.(22) Some KPMs, such as 3-HK in striatal neurons and KynA and XA in cells, can be imported into cells via organic anion transporters 1 and 3 (OAT1/SLC22A6 and OAT3/SLC22A8), which have been immunohistochemically detected in human muscle fibers. However, because KynA and XA have lower plasma concentrations than Kyn and Trp, and LATs are blocked competitively by other amino acids, the majority of KPMs are likely generated within the muscle.(39)(40) Many kynurenine pathway enzymes are found in muscle fibers, including kynurenine aminotransferases (KATs), kynureninase (KynU), kynurenine 3-monooxygenase (KMO), and 3-hydroxyanthranilate 3,4-dioxygenase (3-HAO). Because skeletal muscle has low IDO expression and TDO activity, kynurenine (Kyn) is more likely generated in the liver or immune cells and delivered into muscle fibers. Kyn can be converted into KynA, AA, or 3-HK once inside the muscle fiber. The PGC-11/PPAR/ signaling pathway increases the production of KATs, which convert Kyn to KynA.(41) Pyridoxal-5′-phosphate (PLP), the active form of vitamin B6, is required by KATs to transfer an amino group from one substrate to another, resulting in kynurenic acid (KynA) from Kyn. KATs are highly flexible enzymes that have been classified into four types: KAT 1 (glutamine transaminase K and cysteine conjugate-lyase), KAT 2 (aminoadipate aminotransferase), KAT 3 (CCBL2), and KAT 4 (glutamic-oxaloacetic transaminase 2 and mitochondrial aspartate aminotransferase). From 3-hydroxykynurenine (3-HK), KATs can also create xanthurenic acid (XA). KATs employ Kyn and 3-HK to create KynA and XA in resting mouse skeletal muscle. KAT expression in muscle is regulated by PGC-11 and begins in oxidative fibers with high amounts of this coactivator. Exercise enhances the expression of KATs in skeletal muscle, according to studies on mice and humans.(22)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">There have been few reports of transporters that carry metabolites from the Kynurenine pathway (KPMs) into cells. LATs, as well as OAT1/SLC22A6 and OAT3/SLC22A8, have been connected to the uptake of specific KPMs in neurons and muscle fibers.(45) However, because KynA and XA are found in low concentrations in the blood and because amino acids inhibit LATs, it is likely that the majority of KPMs are generated within muscle fibers.(35) (39) Although it is unknown how exercise changes Trp metabolite concentrations, KynA routinely increases following acute endurance exercise, and chronic endurance exercise in humans enhances the expression of all four KATs.(46) Chronic endurance exercise or PGC-1 overexpression in mice increases the expression of KAT 1, 3, 4, and 3-HAO but not KynU or KMO. In mice, a muscle-specific genetic deletion of PGC-1 suppresses both exercise-induced KAT expression and increased plasma KynA. It is currently unknown how much Kyn, KynA, and other Trp-metabolites are present in skeletal muscle fibers after exercise.(47) Exercise may influence the kynurenine pathway by decreasing the enzymatic activity of KMO and 3-HAO due to increased O2 consumption, as well as by suppressing PHDs, which use -ketoglutarate to hydroxylate HIF-1, making it available to KATs. This process has been proposed to explain how liver KATs manufacture KynA from skeletal muscle -ketoglutarate excess. These occurrences drive Kyn down the KynA and XA degradation branch via the NAD+ pathway. During submaximal activity, PLP is diverted to skeletal muscle, where it may fuel enzymes such as KATs and KynU that require this cofactor. Exercise can boost the production of KATs, which convert Kyn to KynA, while decreasing the activity of some enzymes involved in KPM metabolism, such as KMO and 3-HAO. Exercise may also transfer the cofactor PLP to skeletal muscle, where it can fuel enzymes like KATs and KynU that require this cofactor. However, the precise effects of exercise on the amounts of various Trp metabolites within muscle fibers remain unknown.(48)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">GPR35 is a membrane protein that was found in 1997. It is typically related with Gi/o proteins, but when activated, it can also be coupled with other proteins such as G13, Gq/11, and -arrestin. GPR35 is mostly expressed in the gastrointestinal system and particular immune cells, although it is also found in neurons, parts of the central nervous system, vascular smooth muscle cells, endothelial cells, and adipocytes.(28) Because GPR35 was previously thought to be an orphan receptor, the identification of KynA as an endogenous ligand for it was noteworthy. Other compounds that have been found as possible GPR35 ligands include NPPB, Zaprinast, lysophosphatidic acid, and pamoic acid.(30) GPR35 activation has been linked to a variety of biological outcomes, including pain modulation, blood pressure regulation, immune response attenuation, and adipocyte energy expenditure. GPR35 expression is highest in human</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">immune cells such neutrophils, T cells, and dendritic cells and lowest in B cells, eosinophils, basophils, and platelets. The potential role of KynA and GPR35 in muscle-to-immune cell communication during exercise is being investigated. (29)The period of sample collection should be carefully examined when assessing the effects of acute or chronic exercise on the KYN pathway. Acute exercise samples should be collected shortly after activity and throughout recovery to show result kinetics, whereas chronic exercise samples should be collected in a resting state, usually 24 hours or longer after the last exercise session. (31)Incomplete recovery and adaption mechanisms following acute exercise, on the other hand, could potentially skew the outcomes of chronic exercise, resulting in no apparent effects.(29)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">In healthy subject IDO activity closely interacts with the immune system. Especially peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) have been shown to be potent producers of IDO.(32)(33) Based on immune homeostasis, IDO mediated conversion of TRP to KYN is suspected to be constant and almost entirely mediated by TDO under basal conditions. In contrast, local and systemic inflammatory stimuli provoke a dramatic increase in IDO1 mediated conversion.(34) Particularly, elevated levels of interferongamma (IFN-y)(35), but also increases in other pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as interleukin (IL)-6 (30) and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α (25), seem to be decisive stimuli for IDO induction. KYN itself possesses immunomodulatory effects comprising the suppression of cytotoxic T-cell, NK-cell activity (28) and mediating the differentiation of regulatory T-cells (Tregs).(16) Evidence suggests that the IDO1-mediated conversion to KYN activates the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR), which plays a key role in T-cell differentiation.(31) Furthermore, a chronic inflammation-induced activation of the A consistent decrease in the bioavailability of TRP that is essential for the neurotransmitter serotonin seems to be one causal factor. If chronic inflammatory conditions are present, the degradation of available TRP through the KYN pathway is pathologically increased, which consequently leads to an impaired synthesis of the neurotransmitter serotonin. (22)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The kynurenine pathway is a metabolic route involved in the breakdown of tryptophan, an amino acid found in many foods. There are two main enzymatic pathways in tryptophan breakdown: the serotonin pathway and the kynurenine pathway. The kynurenine pathway is regulated by enzymes such as tryptophan 2,3-dioxygenase and indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase, and it is responsible for the majority of tryptophan breakdown. This pathway produces kynurenine, which can be further converted into either neuroprotective kynurenic acid or neurotoxic quinolinic acid. The kynurenine pathway is influenced by factors such as cortisol levels, inflammatory cytokines, and the presence of inflammation. It plays a role in immune function, energy metabolism, and the regulation of inflammation. (11)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The phrase &quot;immune privilege&quot; was first used to describe the inhibition of inflammatory reactions within anatomically protected organs such as the eyes, brain, placenta, and testes. Cellular and metabolic systems that orchestrate immune responses, on the other hand, govern inflammation inside these sites. Our present understanding of tolerogenic pathways includes hair follicles, the colon, and cancer in the notion of immunological privilege. Cells harboring the enzyme indoleamine-2,3-dioxygenase catabolize tryptophan to create kynurenine metabolites, which regulate local and systemic responses to reduce inflammation, hence maintaining immunological privilege. The kynurenine pathway (KP) is a signaling mechanism that develops and maintains immune-privileged areas while also contributing to cancer immune escape. The discovery of the underlying molecular drivers of the KP in immune-privileged areas and cancer is critical for the development of innovative therapeutics to treat autoimmunity and cancer, as well as to improve transplantation results.The kynurenine pathway's role in generating tolerance in immune-privileged locations, malignancies, and tumor microenvironments.The generation of kynurenine by tumor cell and APC IDO enzymatic activity leads to immunological tolerance in immune-privileged locations and in the tumor microenvironment. Kyn plays an important role in generating Treg cells, which can also be directly triggered by tumor cell cytokines and chemokines. Tumor cells' cytokines and chemokines can also encourage APCs to activate the KP, which leads to tumor formation. The four key KP mechanisms that regulate the immune response are as follows: (1) Trp depletion followed by GCN2 induction and mTOR1 inhibition; (2) activation of AhR by Kyn; (3) Treg induction via CTLA-4 and PTEN expression; and (4) Kyn-mediated IL-2 blockage. Other variables implicated in immunological tolerance include tumor cell PD-1/PD-L1 expression and macrophage MIF expression. Trp concentrations are represented by dotted</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">lines.(12) Since IDO1 is upregulated in tumor microenvironment,(22) it is not surprising that IDO1 has recently attracted extended attention as promising immunotherapeutic target in cancer research.(34)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">In this review a study of elite athletes (healthy subject) found that the quantity and proportion of circulating regulatory T-cells (Treg), which produce anti-inflammatory cytokines like Interleukin 10 and TGF-ß, are positively associated with endurance ability. Athletes were shown to have higher levels of circulating Treg than non-athletes of the same age. The short-term inflammation that occurs after each exercise session is thought to promote a long-term adaptation in the body's anti-inflammatory response, but the exact process is unknown.(31) Acute endurance training increased kyn levels and the kynirenine triptophan ratio in healthy older women.(36)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Nonetheless, animal models and a randomized controlled study in breast cancer patients have shown promising results.(37) Acute exercise activates the KYN pathway, as seen by lower levels of TRP and higher levels of KYN in human serum or plasma. The majority of these research concentrated on high-intensity aerobic activity, such as progressive exercise tests to exhaustion.(11)(38)Acute exercise also increases metabolic flow towards KA, possibly due to increased KAT enzyme expression. Furthermore, after intense exercise, the primary branch of the KYN pathway leading to QA can be increased.(31)(37) whereas Joisten et al discovered that hypertrophy strength exercise (HYP) can increase the metabolic flow of the KYN route towards kynurenic acid (KA), potentially promoting KYN clearance and immunomodulatory effects. According to the findings, future research should focus on the effects of strength training on the KYN pathway, particularly hypertrophic strength exercise modalities. These findings have substantial implications for a variety of clinical populations suffering from inflammatory disorders, as strength exercise-induced KYN pathway regulation may activate anti-inflammatory and neuroprotective actions. Longer-term research are needed to look into potential chronic modulations of the KYN pathway caused by strength training.(22) Tsuji et al. examined the tryptophan and kynurenine pathway's function in the development of immune-related illnesses. They discovered that an imbalance between pro-inflammatory and anti-inflammatory pathways may play a role in the etiology of certain immune-related disorders. They also highlighted that the kynurenine pathway could be a suitable target for the development of novel immunotherapies.(30)</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>CONCLUSION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">In summary, In healthy individuals, exercise, especially endurance training, has been found to increase the levels of regulatory T-cells (Tregs) that produce anti-inflammatory cytokines. This suggests that exercise promotes an adaptive anti-inflammatory response in the body. Acute endurance training has also been shown to increase kynurenine levels and the kynurenine to tryptophan ratio in older women. Animal models and studies in breast cancer patients have shown promising results in activating the kynurenine pathway through acute exercise. High-intensity aerobic activity and hypertrophy strength exercise have been found to influence the metabolic flow within the kynurenine pathway, leading to increased levels of kynurenic acid (KA) and potentially promoting immunomodulatory effects. Strength training may have implications for clinical populations with inflammatory disorders, as it can activate antiinflammatory and neuroprotective actions through the regulation of the kynurenine pathway. Imbalance between pro-inflammatory and anti-inflammatory pathways in the tryptophan and kynurenine pathway may contribute to the development of immune-related disorders, making the kynurenine pathway a potential target for novel immunotherapies. Further research is needed to explore the chronic modulations of the kynurenine pathway caused by strength training.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Endurance and resistance exercise (EE and RE) can affect the kynurenine pathway and improve immune function through influencing immune cell mediators. Exercise therapies in cancer patients can result in a drop in kynurenine levels and a rise in tryptophan and kynurenic acid, all of which are related with enhanced immune function and lower inflammation. According to this study, exercise can be used as a non-pharmacological intervention to improve immune function and perhaps prevent chronic diseases related with inflammation and immunological dysfunction. Futher research is needed, however, to completely understand how exercise impacts the kynurenine pathway and immunological function.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Depending on the demographic and health condition of concern, the best type, intensity, and duration of exercise for modifying the kynurenine pathway and boosting immune function may change. As a result, more complete recommendations for exercise as a therapeutic intervention will necessitate additional research into the effects of exercise on immunological function and the kynurenine pathway in healthy and cancer subject.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>CONFLICT OF INTEREST</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">No conflicts of interest are disclosed by the authors.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>ACKNOWLEDGEMENT</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">All of the authors would like to express their gratitude to the Head and all members of the Physiology Department Medical Faculty at Udayana University Denpasar, Indonesia, for their assistance and the opportunity to contribute to this literature study.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>REFERENCES</span></h2>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;UN DESA Population Division. World Population Ageing 2020 Highlights - Ten key messages. United</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Nations. 2020;(October 2020):1–2.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Wang Y, Dong C, Han Y, Gu Z, Sun C. Immunosenescence, aging and successful aging. Front Immunol.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">2022;13(August):1–18.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Fulop T, Larbi A, Dupuis G, Page A Le, Frost EH, Cohen AA, et al. Immunosenescence and inflamm-aging</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">as two sides of the same coin: Friends or Foes? Front Immunol. 2018;8(JAN).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Chupel MU, Direito F, Furtado GE, Minuzzi LG, Pedrosa FM, Colado JC, et al. Strength training decreases</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">inflammation and increases cognition and physical fitness in older women with cognitive impairment. Front Physiol. 2017;8(JUN):1–13.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Badawy AAB. Kynurenine pathway of tryptophan metabolism: Regulatory and functional aspects. Int J</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Tryptophan Res. 2017;10(1).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Metghalchi S, Ponnuswamy P, Simon T, Haddad Y, Laurans L, Clément M, et al. Indoleamine 2,3-</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">dioxygenase fine-tunes immune homeostasis in atherosclerosis and colitis through repression of interleukin-10 production. Cell Metab. 2015;22(3):460–71.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Mithaiwala MN, Santana-Coelho D, Porter GA, O’connor JC. Neuroinflammation and the Kynurenine</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">pathway in CNS disease: Molecular mechanisms and therapeutic implications. Cells. 2021;10(6):1–42.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">8. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Vécsei L, Szalárdy L, Fülöp F, Toldi J. Kynurenines in the CNS: Recent advances and new questions. Nat</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Rev Drug Discov [Internet]. 2013;12(1):64–82. Available from: </span><a href="http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nrd3793"><span class="font2">http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nrd3793</span></a></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">9. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;O’Mahony SM, Clarke G, Borre YE, Dinan TG, Cryan JF. Serotonin, tryptophan metabolism and the brain-</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">gut-microbiome axis. Behav Brain Res [Internet]. 2015;277:32–48. Available from: </span><a href="http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.bbr.2014.07.027"><span class="font2">http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.bbr.2014.07.027</span></a></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">10. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Hennings A, Schwarz MJ, Riemer S, Stapf TM, Selberdinger VB, Rief W. Exercise affects symptom severity</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">but not biological measures in depression and somatization - Results on IL-6, neopterin, tryptophan, kynurenine and 5-HIAA. Psychiatry Res [Internet]. 2013;210(3):925–33. Available from: </span><a href="http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.psychres.2013.09.018"><span class="font2">http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.psychres.2013.09.018</span></a></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">11. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Komiya T, Huang CH. Updates in the clinical development of Epacadostat and other indoleamine 2,3-</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">dioxygenase 1 inhibitors (IDO1) for human cancers. Front Oncol. 2018;8(OCT):1–7.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">12. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Routy JP, Routy B, Graziani GM, Mehraj V. The kynurenine pathway is a double-edged sword in immune-</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">privileged sites and in cancer: Implications for immunotherapy. Int J Tryptophan Res. 2016;9(1):67–77.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">13. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Agudelo LZ, Femenía T, Orhan F, Porsmyr-Palmertz M, Goiny M, Martinez-Redondo V, et al. Skeletal</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">muscle PGC-1α1 modulates kynurenine metabolism and mediates resilience to stress-induced depression. Cell. 2014;159(1):33–45.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">14. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Taleb S. Tryptophan Dietary Impacts Gut Barrier and Metabolic Diseases. Front Immunol.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">2019;10(September):1–7.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">15. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Agudelo LZ, Ferreira DMS, Cervenka I, Bryzgalova G, Dadvar S, Jannig PR, et al. Kynurenic Acid and Gpr35</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Regulate Adipose Tissue Energy Homeostasis and Inflammation. Cell Metab. 2018;27(2):378-392.e5.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">16. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Zeitelhofer M, Adzemovic MZ, Gomez-Cabrero D, Bergman P, Hochmeister S, N’diaye M, et al. Functional</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">genomics analysis of Vitamin D effects on CD4+ T cells in vivo in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2017;114(9):E1678–87.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">17. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Schiering C, Wincent E, Metidji A, Iseppon A, Li Y, Potocnik AJ, et al. Feedback control of AHR signalling</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">regulates intestinal immunity. Nature [Internet]. 2017;542(7640):242–5. Available from: </span><a href="http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nature21080"><span class="font2">http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nature21080</span></a></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">18. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Strasser B, Geiger D, Schauer M, Gatterer H, Burtscher M, Fuchs D. Effects of exhaustive aerobic exercise</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">on tryptophan-kynurenine metabolism in trained athletes. PLoS One. 2016;11(4):1–10.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">19. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Saran T, Turska M, Kocki T, Zawadka M, Zieliński G, Turski WA, et al. Effect of 4-week physical exercises</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">on tryptophan, kynurenine and kynurenic acid content in human sweat. Sci Rep [Internet]. 2021;11(1):1–7. Available from: </span><a href="https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-90616-6"><span class="font2">https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-90616-6</span></a></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">20. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Pal A, Schneider J, Schlüter K, Steindorf K, Wiskemann J, Rosenberger F, et al. Different endurance exercises</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">modulate NK cell cytotoxic and inhibiting receptors. Eur J Appl Physiol [Internet]. 2021;121(12):3379–87. Available from: </span><a href="https://doi.org/10.1007/s00421-021-04735-z"><span class="font2">https://doi.org/10.1007/s00421-021-04735-z</span></a></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">21. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Joisten N, Schumann M, Schenk A, Walzik D, Freitag N, Knoop A, et al. Acute hypertrophic but not maximal</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">strength loading transiently enhances the kynurenine pathway towards kynurenic acid. Eur J Appl Physiol [Internet]. 2020;120(6):1429–36. Available from: </span><a href="https://doi.org/10.1007/s00421-020-04375-9"><span class="font2">https://doi.org/10.1007/s00421-020-04375-9</span></a></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">22. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Joisten N, Kummerhoff F, Koliamitra C, Schenk A, Walzik D, Hardt L, et al. Exercise and the Kynurenine</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">pathway: Current state of knowledge and results from a randomized cross-over study comparing acute effects of endurance and resistance training. Exerc Immunol Rev. 2020;26(16):24–42.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">23. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Zimmer P, Schmidt ME, Prentzell MT, Berdel B, Wiskemann J, Kellner KH, et al. Resistance exercise reduces</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">kynurenine pathway metabolites in breast cancer patients undergoing radiotherapy. Front Oncol. 2019;9(SEP):1–11.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">24. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Pal A, Zimmer P, Clauss D, Schmidt ME, Ulrich CM, Wiskemann J, et al. Resistance Exercise Modulates</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Kynurenine Pathway in Pancreatic Cancer Patients. Int J Sports Med. 2021;42(1):33–42.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">25. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Savitz J. The kynurenine pathway: a finger in every pie. Mol Psychiatry. 2020;25(1):131–47.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">26. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Wirthgen E, Hoeflich A, Rebl A, Günther J. Kynurenic Acid: The Janus-faced role of an immunomodulatory</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">tryptophan metabolite and its link to pathological conditions. Front Immunol. 2018;8(JAN).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">27. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Zulpaite R, Miknevicius P, Leber B, Strupas K, Stiegler P, Schemmer P. Tryptophan metabolism via</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Kynurenine pathway: Role in solid organ transplantation. Int J Mol Sci. 2021;22(4):1–32.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">28. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Resta F, Masi A, Sili M, Laurino A, Moroni F, Mannaioni G. Kynurenic acid and zaprinast induce analgesia</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">by modulating HCN channels through GPR35 activation. Neuropharmacology [Internet]. 2016;108:136–43. Available from: </span><a href="http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropharm.2016.04.038"><span class="font2">http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropharm.2016.04.038</span></a></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">29. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Millischer V, Erhardt S, Ekblom Ö, Forsell Y, Lavebratt C. Twelve-week physical exercise does not have a</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">long-lasting effect on kynurenines in plasma of depressed patients. Neuropsychiatr Dis Treat. 2017;13:967– 72.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">30. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Tsuji A, Ikeda Y, Yoshikawa S, Taniguchi K, Sawamura H, Morikawa S, et al. The Tryptophan and</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Kynurenine Pathway Involved in the Development of Immune-Related Diseases. Int J Mol Sci. 2023;24(6):5742.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">31. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Schlittler M, Goiny M, Agudelo LZ, Venckunas T, Brazaitis M, Skurvydas A, et al. Endurance exercise</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">increases skeletal muscle kynurenine aminotransferases and plasma kynurenic acid in humans. Am J Physiol - Cell Physiol. 2016;310(10):C836–40.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">32. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Sekine A, Okamoto M, Kanatani Y, Sano M, Shibata K, Fukuwatari T. Amino acids inhibit kynurenic acid</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">formation via suppression of kynurenine uptake or kynurenic acid synthesis in rat brain in vitro. Springerplus. 2015;4(1).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">33. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Sekine A, Kuroki Y, Urata T, Mori N, Fukuwatari T. Inhibition of Large Neutral Amino Acid Transporters</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Suppresses Kynurenic Acid Production Via Inhibition of Kynurenine Uptake in Rodent Brain. Neurochem Res. 2016;41(9):2256–66.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">34. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Balducci, Stefano, Sacchetti, Massimo, Haxhi, Jonida, Orlando, Giorgio, D’Errico, Valeria, Fallucca, Sara,</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Menini, Stefano, Pugliese G. Physical Exercise as therapy for type II diabetes. Diabetes Metab Res Rev [Internet]. 2014;32(30):13–23. Available from: </span><a href="http://libweb.anglia.ac.uk/"><span class="font2">http://libweb.anglia.ac.uk/</span></a></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">35. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bansi J, Koliamitra C, Bloch W, Joisten N, Schenk A, Watson M, et al. Persons with secondary progressive</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">and relapsing remitting multiple sclerosis reveal different responses of tryptophan metabolism to acute endurance exercise and training. J Neuroimmunol [Internet]. 2018;314:101–5. Available from: </span><a href="http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jneuroim.2017.12.001"><span class="font2">http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jneuroim.2017.12.001</span></a></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">36. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Koliamitra C, Javelle F, Joisten N, Shimabukuro-Vornhagen A, Bloch W, Schenk A, et al. Do acute exercise-</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">induced activations of the kynurenine pathway induce regulatory T-cells on the long-term? – A theoretical frame work supported by pilot data. J Sport Sci Med. 2019;18(4):669–73.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">37. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Agudelo LZ, Ferreira DMS, Dadvar S, Cervenka I, Ketscher L, Izadi M, et al. Skeletal muscle PGC-1α1</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">reroutes kynurenine metabolism to increase energy efficiency and fatigue-resistance. Nat Commun [Internet]. 2019;10(1):1–12. Available from: </span><a href="http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-10712-0"><span class="font2">http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-10712-0</span></a></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">38. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Metcalfe AJ, Koliamitra C, Javelle F, Bloch W, Zimmer P. Acute and chronic effects of exercise on the</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">kynurenine pathway in humans – A brief review and future perspectives. Physiol Behav [Internet]. 2018;194:583–7. Available from: </span><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physbeh.2018.07.015"><span class="font2">https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physbeh.2018.07.015</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">152</span></p>