---
layout: full_article
title: "RELATIONSHIP OF BODY SIZE TO BEHAVIOR IN KINTAMANI DOGS"
author: "Siswanto Siswanto, Nyoman Sadra Dharmawan, I Ketut Puja, I Gusti Agung Arta Putra"
categories: buletinvet
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/buletinvet/full-97624 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/buletinvet/id-97624"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/buletinvet/full-97624"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0">Volume 15 No. 2: 320-324</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">April 2023</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">DOI: 10.24843/bulvet.2023.v15.i02.p19</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Buletin Veteriner Udayana</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">pISSN: 2085-2495; eISSN: 2477-2712</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Online pada: </span><a href="http://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/buletinvet"><span class="font0">http://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/buletinvet</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font0">Terakreditasi Nasional Sinta 4, berdasarkan Keputusan Direktur Jenderal Pendidikan Tinggi, Riset, dan Teknologi No. 158/E/KPT/2021</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>The Relationship of Body Size to Behavior in Kintamani Dogs</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">(HUBUNGAN UKURAN TUBUH TERHADAP PERILAKU ANJING KINTAMANI)</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>Siswanto<sup>1*</sup>, Nyoman Sadra Dharmawan<sup>2</sup>, I Ketut Puja<sup>3</sup>, I Gusti Agung Arta Putra<sup>4</sup></span></h2>
<p><span class="font2"><sup>1</sup>Laboratory of Veterinary Physiology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Udayana University, PB Sudirman St. Campus, Denpasar, Bali, Indonesia.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2"><sup>2</sup>Laboratory of Veterinary Clinic, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Udayana University, PB Sudirman St. Campus, Denpasar, Bali, Indonesia.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2"><sup>3</sup>Laboratory of Veterinary, Genetic and Reproduction Technology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Udayana University, PB Sudirman St. Campus, Denpasar, Bali, Indonesia.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2"><sup>4</sup>Faculty of Animal Science, Udayana University, PB Sudirman St. Campus, Denpasar, Bali, Indonesia.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">*Email:</span><a href="mailto:siswantofkh@gmail.com"><span class="font2"> </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">siswantofkh@gmail.com</span></a></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>Abstract</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">The Balinese believe that body size (the ratio of body length to snout length) in dogs is related to behavior, therefore body size is used to predict dog character. How to predict by measuring body size is a local wisdom that is still trusted for choosing a good dog. This belief has been running for a long time from their ancestors and has become a culture. Dog behavior according to local wisdom in Bali in general and in Sukawana Village, Kintamani District, Bangli Regency in particular, is categorized as: guna, jaya, forced, tek and kyul. Guna is a dog with an obedient character, useful and suitable as a hunting dog. Jaya is a dog with good character, attractive, energetic, tends to be hyperactive, this type of dog is also good for hunting. Force is a dog that is difficult to manage, requiring special handling, suitable for keeping the house. Tek is a dog with dirty behavior and difficult to train or manage and Kyul is a dog with a lazy character. A total of 66 Kintamani dogs were used as experimental animals. The research design used a cross-sectional study design. Body size observation data was then compared with clinical observations in the same dog. The results show that there is a relationship between behavior and body size (ratio of body length to snout length). It was concluded that body size (body length to snout length ratio) can be implemented to predict behavior.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Keywords: Behavior; body length; dogs</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstrak</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Masyarakat Bali percaya bahwa ukuran tubuh (rasio panjang tubuh dengan panjang moncong) pada anjing berhubungan dengan perilaku, oleh karena itu ukuran tubuh digunakan untuk memprediksi karakter anjing. Cara memprediksi dengan mengukur ukuran tubuh merupakan kearifan lokal yang masih tetap dipercaya untuk pemilihan anjing yang baik. Kepercayaan ini sudah berjalan lama dari leluhur mereka dan sudah menjadi budaya. Perilaku anjing menurut kearifan lokal di Bali pada umumnya dan di Desa Sukawana, Kecamatan Kintamani, Kabupaten Bangli pada khususnya, dikategorikan sebagai: </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">guna, jaya, paksa, tek</span><span class="font1"> dan </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">kyul</span><span class="font1">. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Guna</span><span class="font1"> merupakan anjing dengan karakter penurut, berguna dan cocok digunakan sebagai anjing pemburu. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Jaya</span><span class="font1"> adalah anjing berkarakter bagus, atraktif, energik, cenderung hiperaktif, anjing jenis ini juga baik untuk berburu. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Paksa</span><span class="font1"> adalah anjing yang sulit diatur, memerlukan penanganan khusus, cocok untuk penjaga rumah. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Tek</span><span class="font1"> adalah anjing berperilaku kotor dan sulit dilatih ataupun diatur dan </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">kyul</span><span class="font1"> adalah anjing berkarakter pemalas. Sebanyak 66 ekor anjing kintamani digunakan sebagai hewan coba. Rancangan penelitian menggunakan rancangan </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">crosssecsional study</span><span class="font1">. Data pengamatan berdasarkan ukuran tubuh kemudian dikomparasi dengan pengamatan secara klinis pada anjing yang sama. Hasil menunjukkan terdapat hubungan antara perilaku dengan ukuran tubuh (rasio panjang tubuh dengan panjang moncong). Disimpulkan bahwa ukuran tubuh (rasio panjang tubuh dan panjang moncong) dapat diimplementasikan untuk memprediksi perilaku.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Kata kunci: Anjing; perilaku; ukuran tubuh</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>INTRODUCTION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">The Balinese believe that body size (body length to snout ratio) is related to behavior. How to predict by measuring body size is a local wisdom that is still trusted to choose a good dog. This belief as the wisdom of the local Balinese people has been going on for a long time from their ancestors and has become a culture. Dog behavior according to local wisdom in Bali in general and in Sukawana Village, Kintamani District, Bangli Regency in particular is proposed as: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">guna</span><span class="font2">, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">jaya</span><span class="font2">, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">paksa</span><span class="font2">, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">tek</span><span class="font2"> and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">kyul</span><span class="font2">. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Guna</span><span class="font2"> is a docile dog, useful and suitable as a hunting dog. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Jaya</span><span class="font2"> is a dog with good character, attractive, energetic, tends to be hyperactive, this dog breed is also good for hunting. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Paksa</span><span class="font2"> is a dog that is difficult to manage, requiring special handling, suitable for keeping the house. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Tek</span><span class="font2"> is a dog that behaves dirty and is difficult to manage or manage. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Kyul</span><span class="font2"> is a dog with a lazy character (Dharmawan, 2009; Carcan, 2017).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Dogs have different characters such as fierce, obedient, agile and lazy (Martin and Bateson, 1986; Miklosi, 2007; Mehrkama and Wynnea, 2014). Research shows body size, skull shape, distance between eyes are related to dog behavior (Helton and Helton, 2010; McGreevy </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">et al</span><span class="font2">., 2013). Cannas </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">et al</span><span class="font2">., (2018) stated that body size, gender and age affect dog behavior. Similarly, recent research at the University of Sydney further proves Coppinger's theory, which suggests that the size and shape of a dog's skull are important factors in shaping behavior. Certain physical characteristics in dogs are consistently associated with certain types of behavior. There is a strong relationship between height, weight, video proportions (relative width and length) and behavior. Basically, the shorter the dog, the less regulated its behavior.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The only behavioral trait associated with height is training (Lindsay, 2005; Jensen, 2007; Blackwell </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">et al</span><span class="font2">., 2008).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">When the average body weight decreased, excitability and hyperactivity increased. The ratio of the width to the length of the</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">skull is an interesting casing. Long-headed dogs, such as Afghans, Salukis, and Whippets, seem to be the product of choice for targeting, because of these indicators. Conversely, the booking results that a short-faced dog, such as the pug, that has some boyish features is not a hunting dog. unwanted behavior such as aggression towards owners, or towards partners, is more common in small dogs. This suggests that, in smaller dogs, they have a less tolerant behavior, while larger dogs have a more tolerant behavior. Recent reports have shown that the structure of the dog's eyes and brain depends on the shape of the skull and the shape of the skull depends on the sex (McGreevy </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">et al</span><span class="font2">., 2013).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">A dog's height can be used to predict a number of aspects of a dog's behavioral tendencies. It may surprise many that shorter dogs are usually more aggressive than taller dogs. Also, taller dogs tend to show more affection, cooperation and play with humans. A dog's weight can also be used to predict certain personality characteristics. Heavier dogs tend to be bolder, more curious and attentive. Lighter dogs tend to be more cautious and have a shy character (Lehner, 1998; Leaver and Reimchen, 2008).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Head shape can also predict some differences &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;in &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;temperament.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Brachycephalic dogs appear to be more involved with their owners with a higher interest in playing with humans. On the other hand, these short-faced dogs are more defensive when faced with difficult situations (such as seeing someone dressed as a ghost). Dolichocephalic dogs tend not to engage in object play, especially with unfamiliar humans. However, this longfaced dog is not easily startled and recovers more quickly when startled (van der Borg, 2015) and Podberscek and Serpell (1997) stated that environmental influences on the expression of aggressive behaviour and Tami </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">et al</span><span class="font2">. (2008) argues that relationship between management factors and dog behavior.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The Balinese believe in ancestral culture that has existed for generations and it is recorded in lontar that body size (the ratio of body length to snout length) can be used to predict dog behavior. Body length is measured from the tip of the nose to the tip of the tail, while the length of the muzzle is measured from the tip of the nose to the horizontal line of the right and left eyes. This belief is based on observations made long ago. From these observations a behavioral formulation was made based on the comparison between body length and snout length, resulting in five categories of behavior. The fifth behavior is arranged sequentially from number one to number five. This behavior is written in Lontar Siksan Wawalungan, Griya Pada, Kerambitan, in the order </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">guna, jaya</span><span class="font2">, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">paksa</span><span class="font2">, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">tek</span><span class="font2"> and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">kyul</span><span class="font2">. Dog behavior with local wisdom approach is used to predict dog behavior as hunting desire.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>RESEARCH METHODS</span></h2>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>Research design</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">The research design used a crosssectional study design and the results are presented in descriptive.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>Sample</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">Sixty six dogs were used in this study, all dogs were observed for clinical symptoms and were physically healthy. The observations were carried out in the village of Sukawana village, Kintamani subdistrict, Bangli district, Bali.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>Data Source Determination</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">The data includes two kinds of observations of body size (the ratio of body length to snout length) and observations of clinical characters (seeing clinical signs). Both observations were carried out by interviewing (questionnaire) with the owner.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>Research variable</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">Independent variable: body size and clinic sign. Dependent variables: behavior according to local wisdom (guna, jaya, forced, tek and kyul) and character based on clinical observations. Controlled variables: place, age, time and type of dog.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>Variable Definitions</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">Body size is the ratio of body length to snout, namely the length of the body from the tip of the nose to the tip of the tail (os coccygea) divided by the length of the snout (measured from the horizontal line of the right eye with the left to the tip of the nose) (Carcan Asu. 2017). And clinical signs are an objective description of behavior. Behavior according to local wisdom: Guna is a dog with an energetic character, obedient, useful, easy to train. Jaya: is a dog with an attractive character, energetic, tends to be hyperactive, suitable for use as a hunter. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Paksa</span><span class="font2">is a dog with a difficult character to manage, needs coercion from the owner, suitable for keeping the house. Tek is a dog characterized by dirty behavior, difficult to manage / train. Kyul is a dog with a lazy character, likes to eat and sleep (Carcan, 2017). All dog samples came from the same place, age, time and type of dog.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>Data analysis</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">Data were analyzed descriptively by comparing clinical observations with body size observations. Then a percentage that describes the truth value (Snedecor and Cochron, 1994).</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>RESULTS AND DISCUSSION</span></h2>
<h2><a name="bookmark24"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark25"></a>Results</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">The relationship (association) of behavior (body size) with behavior clinical sign shows that there is compatibility. Data on body size respectively: 23 dogs, jaya, 18 dogs, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">paksa</span><span class="font2"> 9, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">tek</span><span class="font2"> 9 dogs, 7 dogs </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">kyul</span><span class="font2">. While data from clinical sign are 18 </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">jaya</span><span class="font2">, 13 dogs, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">paksa</span><span class="font2"> 11 dogs, 14 dogs </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">tek</span><span class="font2">, and 10 dogs </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">kyul</span><span class="font2">. The mean percentage of conformity between behavior by body size and behavior by clinical sign was 73.3%. The complete relationship (association) of behavior (body size) with behavior on clinical sign is presented in Table 1.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark26"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark27"></a>Discussion</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">The results between behavior (clinical observation) and behavior (body size) are quite similar. The statistical test obtained a correlation of 73.3%. This shows that the</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">level of truth of the behavior prediction system based on the body size of 100 dogs, 73 dogs is in accordance with clinical observations. The meaning of the theory used by the Balinese people as local wisdom is proven to be found that there is a relationship between body size (ratio of body length to snout length) in dogs and behavior.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In accordance with research conducted by Helton and Helton (2010) that body size (large dogs, small dogs) is related to dog behavior (intelligence). He also reported that the distance between the left and right eyes is also related to intelligence.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Several other studies suggest that there is a relationship between a dog's cephalic index (CI: ratio of skull width to skull length) and dog behavior. Using the Canine Behavioral Assessment and Research Questionnaire (C-BARQ) concluded that the ratio of skull width to skull length ratio is associated with behaviors such as emotional urination, tail chasing, compulsive fly snapping, aggression directed at strangers, and staying on stairs. (McGreevy </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">et al</span><span class="font2">., 2013).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">There is a correlation between body size, sex, and age with dog behavior. Dogs are small in size and generally &quot;anxious&quot; rather than &quot;aggressive&quot;; male dogs are mostly &quot;aggressive&quot; and female dogs (neutered and intact) are mostly &quot;anxious&quot;; dogs adopted from pet shops are all anxious (Cannas </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">et al</span><span class="font2">., 2018).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Similarly, recent research at the University of Sydney further substantiates Coppinger's theory, which states that the size and shape of a dog's skull are important factors in shaping behavior. Certain physical characteristics in dogs are consistently associated with certain types of behavior. There is a strong relationship between height, weight, video proportions (relative width and length) and behavior. Basically, the shorter the dog, the more erratic the behavior.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">From the results of clinical observations and some results from previous researchers it can be interpreted that the belief of the</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Balinese people as a wealth of local wisdom can be accepted and used to predict the character or behavior of dogs.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">It can also be understood that behavioral data based on clinical observations and behavior based on body size show that dog behavior is used the most compared to force, jaya, tek, and kyul. This illustrates that according to the posture and comparison of limbs and the character of the Kintamani dog, it is genetically passed on to the next generation to characterize the character of the character. This description shows that most Kintamani dogs have non-aggressive characters.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark28"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark29"></a>CONCLUSION AND SUGGESTION</span></h2>
<h2><a name="bookmark30"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark31"></a>Conclusion</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">The results show that there is a relationship between behavior and body size (ratio of body length to snout length). It was concluded that body size (body length to snout length ratio) can be implemented to predict behavior. From the results of clinical observations and some results from previous researchers it can be interpreted that the belief of the Balinese people as a wealth of local wisdom can be accepted and used to predict the character or behavior of dogs.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark32"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark33"></a>Suggestion</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">Prediction of behavior based on the ratio of body length to muzzle length as a wealth of local wisdom can be maintained. Repeat research can be done by measuring the ratio of body length to muzzle length in young dogs (4-6 months old). Observation of behavior was carried out at an adult age (over 1.5 years of age).</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark34"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark35"></a>ACKNOWLEDGEMENT</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">Thank you to the banjar Klian and the head of Suwana village for the permission to be the research site.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark36"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark37"></a>REFERENCES</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">Blackwell EJ, Seawright A, Twells, C, Casey RA. 2008. The Relationship</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Between Training Methods and the Occurrence of Behavior Problems. In a Population of Domestic Dogs.</span><a href="https://www.researchgate.net/journal/1558-7878_Journal_of_Veterinary_Behavior_Clinical_Applications_and_Research"><span class="font2"> </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">J. Vet.</span></a><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;"> </span><a href="https://www.researchgate.net/journal/1558-7878_Journal_of_Veterinary_Behavior_Clinical_Applications_and_Research"><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Behav. Clin. Appl. Res.</span><span class="font2"> 3</span></a><span class="font2">(5): 207-217.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Cannas S, Talamonti Z, Mazzola S, Minero M, Picciolini A, Palestrini C. 2018. Factors Associated with Dog Behavioral Problems Referred to a Behavior Clinic. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">J. Vet. Behav</span><span class="font2">. 24: 42– 47.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Carcan A. 2017. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Katalog Buku Salinan Lontar</span><span class="font2">. Perpustakaan Kedong Kertya. No. 392.IIIc. Singaraja.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Dharmawan IN. 2009. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Anjing Bali dan Rabies</span><span class="font2">. Cetakan Pertama. Penerbit: </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Buku Arti</span><span class="font2">. Arti Foundation. Denpasar, Bali.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Helton WS and Helton ND. 2010. Physical Size Matters in The Domestic Dog’s (</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Canis lupus familiaris</span><span class="font2">) Ability to Use Human Pointing Cues. &nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Behav.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Processes.</span><span class="font2"> 85(1): 77-79.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Jensen P. 2007. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Behavioural Biology of Dogs</span><span class="font2">. Publisher: CABI ProQuest. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Ebook Central</span><span class="font2">. Penerbit Cromwell Pres.</span></p>
<p><a href="http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/u"><span class="font2">http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/u</span></a><span class="font2"> nud-ebooks/detail.action?doc Created from unud-ebooks on 2018-02-28 19:11:44.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Leaver SDA and Reimchen TE. 2008. Behavioural responses of canis familiaris to different tail lengths of a remotely-controlled life-size dog replica. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Behav.</span><span class="font2"> 145: 377-390.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Lehner. 1998. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Handbook of Ethological Methods</span><span class="font2">. eBook. Cambridge University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Lindsay S. 2005. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Handbook of Applied Dog Behavior and Training Procedures and Protocols</span><span class="font2">. Blackwell, Oxford.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Martin P. and Bateson P. 1986. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Measuring Behaviour</span><span class="font2">. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">McGreevy PD, Georgevsky D, Carrasco J, Valenzuela M, Duffy DL, Serpell JA. 2013. Dog behavior co-varies with height, bodyweight and skull shape. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">PLoS ONE</span><span class="font2">. 8(12): e80529.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Mehrkama LR and Wynnea CDL. 2014. Behavioral differences among </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">breed</span><span class="font2">s of domestic dogs </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">(Canis Lupus Familiaris):</span><span class="font2"> &nbsp;Current status of the</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">science. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Appl. Anim. Behav. Sci</span><span class="font2">. 155: 12-27.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Miklosi A. &nbsp;2007. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Dog, Behaviour,</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Evolution, &nbsp;and &nbsp;Cognition</span><span class="font2">. Oxford</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">University Press, Inc. New York.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Podberscek AL and Serpell JA. 1997. Environmental influences on the expression of aggressive behaviourin English cocker spaniels. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Appl. Anim. Behav. Sci</span><span class="font2">. 52: 215-227.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Snedecor GW and Cochron WG. (1994). </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Statistical Methods</span><span class="font2">. 8<sup>th</sup> ed. Oxford and IBH Publising Co. Calcuta, India.</span></p>
<p><a href="https://www.researchgate.net/profile/G_Tami?_sg=4cm7fxh5Lt9ip9FhlhDmtz70CO-mN1Mb4xu36i9vxglZ-LknvunmN45JZw-KDN86yj907Uqb2sufSGjrWwPf1TfxnjBpd3XWiX0iqvq48BHVECeu-olocRYszeaB3rqxY2XbAEqj-sedlH7mWkLLVkCPx7Gw_v-AYU6ilwhCVg"><span class="font2">Tami </span></a><span class="font2">A,</span><a href="https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Silvana_Diverio?_sg=kRI66wnYn6xwfiAOzmUfNecCZF9klOyeXdMl5ZII3mIKTNkXeSR7aDf1DhSiN1dgo0AttABn0PzuMVV_lBCWj29lj0zmVoiuOiwUh44lrn4EMs0x5E072VP0q7JjnJt32Falia4vFnaMiYlog9hFMgN9DdMy9FekHWy7yzksrQ"><span class="font2"> Diverio </span></a><span class="font2">S,</span><a href="https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Antonino_Barone?_sg=cwXaQODRI9irFVBgDYQhE9eMb7xr8yRqTonwCvZqQTdyzucv4gI7wDDD6Cox5qRXwzxvypa7gYZnQVvZsM1_LJma4bHEFN5agSgUXifpoUuJ_l2YvZ0Rt8LsS83kHtNCrnigza7NxFarw1tDKls1GbWN6UgRzFjG2oe--UXjVQ"><span class="font2"> Barone </span></a><span class="font2">A. 2008. Relationship between management factors and dog behavior in a sample of Argentine dogos in Italy.</span><a href="https://www.researchgate.net/journal/1558-7878_Journal_of_Veterinary_Behavior_Clinical_Applications_and_Research"><span class="font2"> </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">J. Vet. Behav.</span></a><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;"> </span><a href="https://www.researchgate.net/journal/1558-7878_Journal_of_Veterinary_Behavior_Clinical_Applications_and_Research"><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Clin. Appl. Res.</span><span class="font2"> 3</span></a><span class="font2">(2): 59-73.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">T</span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">abel 1. Assciation of Behavior (Body Measurement) with Behavior (Clinical Sign</span><span class="font2">)</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">Behavior</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Body size &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Clinic &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Non-Asosiasi</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">(dogs) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;(dogs) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;(dogs)</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Guna Jaya Paksa Tek Kyul</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">23 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;18 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;5 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;78,3</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">18 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;13 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;5 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;72,2</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">9 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;11 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;81,8</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">9 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;14 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;5 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;64,3</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">7</span><span class="font2"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;10 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;70</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Average &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;73,3</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font0">324</span></p>