---
layout: full_article
title: "Translation Methods And Techniques Applied In English Exposition Texts Into Indonesia"
author: "Urbanus Laratmase, I Nengah Sudipa, Ni Wayan Sukarini"
categories: linguistika
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/full-99104 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/id-99104"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/full-99104"  
comments: true
---

<p><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/linguistika/"><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/linguistika/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">DOI: </span><a href="https://doi.org/10.24843/ling.2023.v30.i01.p05"><span class="font0">https://doi.org/10.24843/ling.2023.v30.i01.p05</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">LINGUISTIKA, MARET 2023</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">p-ISSN: 0854-9613 e-ISSN: 2656-6419</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Vol. 30 No.1</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Translation Methods And Techniques Applied In English Exposition Texts Into Indonesia</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Urbanus Laratmase<sup>1</sup>, I Nengah Sudipa<sup>2</sup>, Ni Wayan Sukarini<sup>3 </sup></span><span class="font1">Maluku<sup>1</sup> English Department, Udayana University, Indonesia<sup>2, 3 </sup>e-mail: </span><a href="mailto:urbanuslaratmase@gmail.com"><span class="font1">urbanuslaratmase@gmail.com</span></a><span class="font1">, </span><a href="mailto:nengahsudipa@yahoo.co.id"><span class="font1">nengahsudipa@yahoo.co.id</span></a><span class="font1">, </span><a href="mailto:wayan_sukarini@unud.ac.id"><span class="font1">wayan_sukarini@unud.ac.id</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstract--</span><span class="font0">The aims of this study are (1) to describe the translation method adopted by the translator in translating the exposition text, (2) to formulate the translation techniques applied in translating the expository text in the order of words, phrases, clauses, and sentences into Indonesian from English by applying translation procedures according to Molina and Albir (2002). This research uses a descriptive – qualitative approach with a case study design that is oriented towards the translation product. The data sources in this study are the document and exposition text “When Being Overweight Is a Health Problem” which was reviewed by Mary L. Gavin, MD and reviewed in 2018 as the object of the study, and the results of the translation from English which are summarized in this research data are in the form of words, phrases, clauses and sentences of expository texts and their translations. Research data was collected by document analysis and analyzed by interactive analysis method. The research findings are as follows, first, seven translation methods are applied in translating expository texts, namely the word-for-word method, the faithful method, the semantic method, the adaptation method, the independent method, the idiomatic method, and the communicative method. Second, eight translation techniques are applied in translating expository texts, namely literal techniques, pure borrowing, natural borrowing, calque, transposition, modulation, omission and addition. Based on the frequency of use, the literal technique ranks first, followed by natural borrowing, pure borrowing, transposition, calque, modulation, omission, and addition techniques. Theoretically, literal, pure borrowing, natural borrowing, and calque techniques are oriented to the source language while transposition, modulation, omission, and addition techniques are oriented to the target language.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Keywords: </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">translation technique, translation method, exposition text.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstrak--</span><span class="font0">Tujuan penelitian ini adalah (1) mendeskripsikan metode penerjemahan yang dianut oleh penerjemah dalam menerjemahkan teks eksposisi, (2) merumuskan teknik penerjemahan yang diterapkan dalam menerjemahkan teks eksposis dalam tatanan kata, frasa, klausa, dan kalimat ke dalam Bahasa Indonesia dari Bahasa inggris dengan menerapkan prosedur penerjemahan menurut Molina dan Albir (2002). Penelitian ini menggunakan pendekatan deskriptif – kualitatif dengan desain studi kasus terpancang yang berorientasi pada produk terjemahan. Sumber data dalam penelitian ini adalah dokumen dan teks eksposisi “When Being Overweight Is a Health Problem” yang diulas oleh Mary L. Gavin, MD dan ditinjau pada tahun 2018 sebagai objek kajiannya, dan hasil terjemahan dari Bahasa inggris yang terangkum pada data penelitian ini berupa kata, frasa, klausa dan kalimat teks eksposisi dan terjemahannya. Data penelitian dikumpulkan dengan analisis dokumen dan dianalisis dengan metode analisis interaktif. Temuan penelitian sebagai berikut, pertama tujuh metode penerjemahan diterapkan dalam menerjemahkan teks eksposisi yaitu metode kata-demi-kata, metode setia, metode semantis, metode saduran, metode bebas, metode idiomatis, dan metode komunikatif. Kedua, diterapkan delapan Teknik penerjemahan dalam menerjemahkan teks eksposisi yaitu Teknik harfiah, peminjaman murni, peminjaman alamiah, calque, transposisi, modulasi, penghilangan dan penambahan. Berdasarkan frekuensi penggunaannya diperoleh teknik harfiah menempati urutan pertama, yang diikuti oleh peminjaman alamiah, peminjaman murni, transposisi, </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">calque</span><span class="font0">, modulasi, penghilangan, dan teknik penambahan. Secara teori, teknik harfiah, peminjaman murni, peminjaman alamiah, dan teknik </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">calque</span><span class="font0"> berorientasi pada bahasa sumber sedangkan teknik transposisi, modulasi, penghilangan, dan teknik penambahan berorientasi pada bahasa sasaran.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Kata Kunci : </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Teknik terjemahan, metode terjemahan, teks eksposisi.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Vol. 30 No.1</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Introduction</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Translation activities have a very important role in today’s global communication as a change in the form of the source text (ST) into the target text (TT) where the meaning must remain the same. The translation consists of searching for the lexicon, grammatical structure, communication situation, and cultural context of the source language, analyzing to determine meaning and reconstructing the same meaning using a lexicon and a reasonable grammatical structure in the target language. In the target language while maintaining the semantic equivalent and style of the source language by referring to translation as a product (Larson, 1984:3).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In translating, translators carry out planned activities aimed at bridging two different cultural environments. The translated text is the embodiment of the procedures, rules, and principles that are the general conventions of writing certain types of discourse. This convention is reflected in the choice of lexical vocabulary and grammatical patterns that characterize certain areas of reality. Certain linguistic tools become regular features of discourse construction, which helps translators to recognize them. This orderly nature is the basis of the text, which is important in translation activities (Hartono, 2017).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Apart from the difficulty and complexity of the problem and the translation process, the importance of translation as a catalyst for science and technology experts is felt especially for developing countries. Massive translation efforts carried out by translators have resulted in the rapid development of science and technology in addition to the same benefits, both the translation as a quality translation product is no less important to be studied further.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">This translation gap is the starting point for choosing books as the main data source for this research. In addition, texts related to exposition are sensitive argumentative texts. Translators are required to be more careful in analyzing the source text and transferring it into the target text. By referring to three typologies of text: informative, expressive, and operative which was initiated by Reiss (2000:160), the object text of this research is included in the typology of informative text. In</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">other words, translators are required to transfer the content or message of the source text as accurately as possible. This demand departs from the function of the text which emphasizes more on accurate information. when using a pragmatic concept, the maxim of quality is the most prominent maxim.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The translation efforts carried out by translators have resulted in the rapid development of science and technology. The transfer of science and technology through translation works was carried out by those in the field of Health, including by Mary L. Gavin, MD, 2018 book title “When Being Overweight Is a Health Problem”. Who has translated the terms obesity into English. This book is recommended as a reference for translators themselves in creating quality translation agents using the calque technique which consists of the same arrangement of phrases between ST and TT as the target text applied in the English–Indonesian translation. In addition, in ST can be understood the </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Menerangkan – Diterangkan </span><span class="font1">(MD). The gap in the translation of the title became the starting point for choosing the book as the primary data source for this research. In addition, the text related to the exposition text is an argumentative text initiated by Otong Setiawan Djuharie, 2009 entitled “ </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Teknik dan Menulis Melalui Eksplorasi Model dan Latihan, Essay Writing</span><span class="font1">” publisher Yrama Widya.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The type of text used in this research is the type of analytical exposition text. This text is a type of text that is studied at the high school and college level. Judging from its generic structure, this text is quite easy and clear so it is very suitable for translators to translate because it contains a lot of information written in English which is still an obstacle for many people, the ability to translate is one of the alternative keys to open a wider space for interaction between people. Users of different languages to master information, science and technology which basically needs to be done to see how the ability to translate analytical exposition texts from English to Indonesian is.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Theoretically, the exposition text is a reflection not only of linguistic conventions but also issues related to social and cultural issues, gender, age, and so on. Therefore, regular features in the construction of discourse and in the selection</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Vol. 30 No.1</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">of vocabulary and grammatical structures in a particular discourse, translators can recognize them and then transfer them into the translated text. Translators must, of course, consider the characteristics of similar discourse in the target language. As a translator, of course he cannot simply ‘replace’ the words in the source text, because translation is not just an activity of changing words.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In this research study, researchers are interested in analytical exposition text because this type of text is included in the type of argumentative text which contains the author’s detailed thoughts about a phenomenon that is around him. The social function of this expository analytical text is to convince the reader that the topic presented is an important topic to discuss or get attention by providing arguments or opinions that support the idea or topic.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method and Theory</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The qualitative descriptive approach used in this study is based on several considerations. First, the data studied are qualitative data, in the form of words, phrases, clauses and sentences, which come from document data sources. The data is then described and adapted to the purpose of this study. Second, this qualitative research approach makes the natural setting a tool for understanding the nature of phenomena, by referring to the descriptive data provided by triangulation for analysis so as to produce a holistic understanding based on the perspective of the participants in accordance with the context. (Moeloeng 2010: 6) qualitative research is research that produces analytical analysis procedures or other qualification methods. In a qualitative descriptive study the data collected is in the form of words, images and not numbers so the research report will be exclude data citations to illustrate the presentation of the report.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In this study, researchers used library research to obtain data related to research. To maximize research results, researchers also use primary and secondary data sources, for the first data, primary data related to research in the process of analyzing translation results, researchers refer to translation methods and techniques including</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">categories of words, phrases, clauses and sentences contained in the text. exposition and for the second data, the researcher refers to the internet as a means of intertextual search in analyzing the translation results. Researchers are interested in exposition texts because this type of text is included in the type of argumentation text which contains the author’s detailed thoughts about a phenomenon that is around. The social function of this exposition text is to convince the reader that the topic presented is an important topic to discuss or get attention by providing arguments or opinions that support the idea or topic.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Yin in Sutopo, 2006:81 says that in content analysis, researchers do not only record important contents written in documents or archives. The data collection technique used in this research is document analysis, this analysis technique is carried out through reading, comparing and notetaking techniques. This note-taking technique is also used in taking notes, the first step is reading the ST in its entirety, then marking the word or phrase from the ST version into the ST. The next step is to sort and organize the data to be analyzed by grouping it based on data from the source text and translated text (TT).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">According to Patton (cited in Moleong, 2001: 103), data analysis is the process of arranging data sequences, organizing them into patterns, categories and basic descriptions. The data analysis methods and techniques used in this study were carried out in accordance with the following steps; (1) Analyzing the translation methods and techniques applied by the translator in translating the exposition analytical text using the theory of the translation method by Newmark (1988) and the theory of translation techniques proposed by Molina and Albir (2002); (2) Verifying the data by observing and noting the emergence of translation techniques and methods applied by the translator in translating the analytical text of the exposition. The application of translation methods and techniques are presented in the form of a description.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The results of data analysis in this study are presented using formal and informal methods. According to Sudaryanto (2015: 241), the formal presentation method is the formulation with</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Vol. 30 No.1</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">numbers, tables, graphics, signs and symbols, while the informal presentation method is using ordinary words, even though it uses technical terminology. Presentation of data in this study using a formal method, the research data is presented in the form of a table consisting of a column of assessment and scoring criteria on the results of the translation of the analytical exposition text. Furthermore, this research uses an informal method, by the use of words and sentences on the analysis methods and techniques used in translating the analytical exposition text.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>The element of analytical exposition text</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">The elements of analytical exposition text are : The general statement of topic discussed Example : </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">The Problem of Being Too Fat</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Being too fat is commonly known as overweight or obesity. It is simply defined as too much body fast inside. Overweight potentially leads high risk of healt problem. Being too fat is recognized as a major factor for heart disease. Due to the overweight, the heart will work harder. It can lead to the heart attack.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Furthermore, obesity potentially rises blood cholesterol and blood pressure. In addition, being too fat can change the amount of sugar in the blood. This will cause diabetes and other serious discase. Besides all of that, being too fat is often avolded by many young woman. They said that becoming too fat will bother their physical beauty appenrence. More serious studies are necessary to see effect of obesity. However it is clear enough that overweigh is not good enough for healthy life.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Result and Discussion</span><br><br><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark10"></a>Translation Techniques</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Molina and Albir (2002: &nbsp;509) define</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">translation technique as a procedure for analyzing and classifying how translation equivalence takes place and can be translated in various lingual units.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark11"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark12"></a>Single Techniques</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">In this study, 6 single techniques were identified, namely literal translation, pure translation, natural borrowing, calque, modulation,</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">and disappearance</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Table 4.1 Single Translation Technique</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Technique</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Single Technique Variant</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Quantity</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">Literal translation</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">128</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Pure translation</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">18</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">Single</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Natural borrowing</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Calque</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">9</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">22</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">Modulation</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">1</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">Disappearance</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">1</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Quantity</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">179</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font1">The application of each of these single techniques to the research data is described below.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark13"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark14"></a>- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Literal Translation</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">By applying the literal technique, the translator tries to adapt the translation to the Indonesian sentence structure and keeps the translated sentence meaning passive.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark15"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark16"></a>Data 089</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">ST : The client are </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">encouraged </span><span class="font1">to lose weight.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">TT : Pasien </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">disarankan </span><span class="font1">untuk menurunkan berat badan.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark17"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark18"></a>Data 098</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">ST : This should </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">be reported </span><span class="font1">to the physician immediately.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">TT : Hal ini harus </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">dilaporkan </span><span class="font1">segera kepada dokter.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark19"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark20"></a>Data 153</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">ST : The antibiotic </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">discovered </span><span class="font1">bay Alexander Flaming 1928 succeeded in reducing the deat rate.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">TT : Antibiotik </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">ditemukan </span><span class="font1">oleh Alexander Flaming pada tahun 1928 berhasil menekan angka kematian karena infeksi.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Vol. 30 No.1</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark21"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark22"></a>Data 216</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">ST : Green tea </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">contains </span><span class="font1">many antioxidants which are good for preventing cancer.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">TT : Teh hijau </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">mengandung </span><span class="font1">banyak antioksidan yang baik untuk mencegah penyakit kanker.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">However, the risk remains that translations often feel unnatural. Source data 122, 184, and 296, for example, are nominal sentences which are translated literally into nominal sentences as well. Indonesian speakers will feel that the translation feels less natural.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark23"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark24"></a>Data 122</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">ST : It is one of the most common heart conditions ini obese people and requires treatment.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">TT : Hal ini merupakan salah satu keadaan jantung yang paling umum terjadi pada orang gemuk dan memerlukan penanganan.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark25"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark26"></a>Data 184</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">ST : It may be congenital in inflants and children.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">TT : Hal ini merupakan penyakit bawaan pada bayi dan anak-anak.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark27"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark28"></a>Data 296</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">ST : It is the leading cause of obesity in the elderly</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">TT : Hal inilah yang menjadi penyebab utama kegemukan pada orang berusia lanjut.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark29"></a><span class="font1"><a name="bookmark30"></a>-</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Natural Translation</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">In this study identified 9 data belonging to this category, namely data numbers 054, 120, 160, 181, 182, 200, 212, 221, and 316. The data is also the title of the subsection and becomes the topic of the subsection. The difference with the previous data is that the borrowing technique applied tries to adjust the pronunciation of this technical term in the health sector with Indonesian pronunciation.</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Data</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Source Text (ST)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Target Text (TT)</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">054</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">Cholelithiasis</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">kolelithiasis</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">120</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">Cholesterol</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">Kolesterol</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">160</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">cardiovascular</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">kardioveskuler</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">182</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">Acarbose</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">Akarbose</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">200</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Hidrofobic</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Hidrofobik</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">212</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">Glaucoma</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">Glaukoma</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">221</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Metabolism of</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Metabolisme</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Carbohydrate</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Karbohidrat</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">316</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">Effect of obesity</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">Efek obesitas</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark31"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark32"></a>- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Modulation</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">In this research, there is one data which is translated by applying modulation technique. below is sample data;</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark33"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark34"></a>Data 176</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">ST : High lipid levels may </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">cause </span><span class="font1">the condition</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">TT : </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Penyebabnya </span><span class="font1">adalah kadar lemak yang tinggi.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In the source sentence, the main problem to be conveyed is the high fat content, while in the translated sentence, the topic is the cause. Changes in point of view like this are basically arbitrary in the sense that these changes are not mandatory.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark35"></a><span class="font1"><a name="bookmark36"></a>-</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Couplet Techniques</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The combination of the two translation techniques intended is a combination of literal and pure borrowing, literal and natural borrowing, literal and transposition, literal and modulation, literal and omission, and literal and addition.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Table. 4.2 Couplet translation technique</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Technique</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Couplet Technique Variants</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Quantity</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">1. Literally + pure borrowing</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">37</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Couplet</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">2. Literally + natural borrowing</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">52</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">3. Literally + transposition</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">17</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">4. Literally + modulation</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">3</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">5. Literally + Calque</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">14</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">6. Literally + dissapearance</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">2</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">7. Literally + addition</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">4</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Quantity</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">129</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font0">Vol. 30 No.1</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The seven variants of the couplet technique are described below.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark37"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark38"></a>- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Literal Technique + Pure Borrowing</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the analysis of some words and phrases that are purely borrowed are:</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Data</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Source Text (ST)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Target Text (TT)</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">065</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">apnea</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">apnea</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">078</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">Leptin</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">leptin</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">082</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">fibrinogen</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">fibrinogen</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">092</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">insulin</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">insulin</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">101</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Glukeneogenesis</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Glukeneogenesis</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">145</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">lipase</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">lipase</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">145</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">Mobilizable</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">mobilizable</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">Lumen</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">Lumen</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">Abdomen</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font1">Abdomen</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Hydrocarbon</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Hydrocarbon</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font1">From the description above, it is clear that almost all words and phrases borrowed are purely related to technical terms in the field of Health.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark39"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark40"></a>- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Literal Techniques + Natural Borrowing</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">In many cases, the application of the literal technique is also accompanied by the application of natural borrowing techniques as shown by the following example:</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark41"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark42"></a>Data 298</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">ST : In the past, the nurse’s job was only to check if the </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">electrocardiogram </span><span class="font1">was still on and then hand the device over to the doctor, but that has ended.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">TT : Di masa lalu tugas perawat adalah hanya memeriksa apakah </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">electrocardiogram </span><span class="font1">tetap menyala dan selanjutnya menyerahkan alat tersebut pada dokter, namun hal itu telah berakhir.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">It is also clear that in it there is a natural borrowing of technical terms in the health sector, namely electrocardiogram, which in the source data is written electrocardiogram. Sample snippets of the results of data analysis of words and phrases</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">borrowed naturally are as follows:</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Data</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Source Text (ST)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Target Text (TT)</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">071</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Diabetic retinopathy</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">Retinopati diabetic</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">086</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Hemodynamics</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Population</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Hemodinamik</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Populasi</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">097</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">Continuously</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">Kontinyu</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">099</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">Frequency</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">Frekuensi</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">298</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">Electrodiagram</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">elektrodiagram</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">209</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">Oxygen Outlet</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font1">Saluran keluar oksigen</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">221</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">Temperature</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font1">Temperature</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark43"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark44"></a>- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Literal Technique + Transposition</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Although, category shifts are commonly applied, the application of this technique can lead to the distortion of meaning or messages because the focus of the conversation or the topic of the sentence has changed.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark45"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark46"></a>Data 017</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">ST : </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Decreased </span><span class="font1">ability of the heartbeat to focus (accommodate) a pumping system (syiring pump) know as Electrocardiogram Bradycardia (EKG).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">TT : </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Penurunan </span><span class="font1">kemampuan detak jantung untuk memfokuskan (mengakomodasikan) suatu sistem kerja pemompaan (syiring pump) dikenal dengan sebutan Bradikardia Elektrocardiogram (EKG).</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark47"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark48"></a>Data 057</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">ST : The swelling is firm to the touch but not painful</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">TT : Pembengkakan terasa keras namun tidak sakit.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark49"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark50"></a>Data 117</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">ST : Suction should be </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">available </span><span class="font1">during this time. TT : Penghisap (suction) sebaiknya </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">digunakan </span><span class="font1">dalam waktu ini.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark51"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark52"></a>- &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Literal Techniques + Additions</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">The same case also occurred in the target data 224 which experienced the addition of words tindakan, and in the target language 228 which has additional words si anak to further clarify that the</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Vol. 30 No.1</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">health background that is meant by the author is the background of the child, not the background of the mother. The addition of lexical elements like that is commonly referred to as explicitization which aims to make something implicit to produce a translation that is not taxa and a translation that is easily understood by the target reader.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark53"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark54"></a>Data 160</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">ST : The heart also give important physical clucs to the specific health of the body.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">TT : </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Kesehatan </span><span class="font1">jantung juga sebagai tanda kondisi fisik yang penting bagi kesehatan badan secara khusus.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark55"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark56"></a>Data 216</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">ST : Complications from specific diseases like hypertension and diabetes mellitus (DM) result in recognizable structural heart damage.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">TT : </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Selain itu</span><span class="font1">, komplikasi dari penyakit khusus seperti hipertensi dan diabetes mellitus (DM) dapat menyebabkan terjadinya kerusakan struktur jantung.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark57"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark58"></a>Data 224</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">ST : Every second counts in preventing damage to the stomach from strong caustic agents such as acid, alkalis, and cleaning agents.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">TT : Setiap hitungan detik </span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">tindakan </span><span class="font1">tersebut dapat mencegah kerusakan lambung dari agen penyebab kuat semacam asam, basa dan agen pembersih.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark59"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark60"></a>Data 228</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">ST : The nurse practitioner takes a health history from the mother.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">TT : perawat meminta keterangan dari ibunya mengenai latar belakang kesehatan si anak.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark61"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark62"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Departing from the research objectives, the research data were then collected and analyzed. From the results of the data analysis of this study, several conclusions can be drawn as follows: (1) In this study, data were identified that were translated not only by a single technique but also by multiple techniques. From 308 data sources analyzed, 179 data were identified which were translated by</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">applying a single technique, 129 data using the multiplet technique. Based on the frequency of occurrence or use in the overall data of this research, it is known that literal translation ranks first (257), followed by natural translation (61), pure translation (55), calque (36), transposition (17), disappearance technique (5 ) modulation (4) and additions (3); &nbsp;&nbsp;(2) In this study, it was</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">identified that the use of the selection of translation methods and translation techniques was more based on the ideology of foreignization although in certain cases it was also supported by the ideology of domestication. In other words, translators tend to adhere to the ideology of foreignization in translating the health text that is the source of the data for this research.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">From the results of this study, it can be concluded that the translator of this text really needs to work together with linguists to improve the quality of the translation. The success of a translation is largely determined by the translator's expertise in utilizing and synergizing the five parameters of translation competence, namely linguistic, textual, scientific, cultural, and transfer competencies. The selection and application of the right technique, understanding the source language message and its transfer with reasonable expression in the target language greatly determines the quality of the translation.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark63"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark64"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;References</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Anakotta, Raisa. 2015. Analysis of shifts in the form and meaning of translated sentences in the description text, reconstruction and exposition on the BBC online media site. Program Studi Linguistik, Pasca Sarjana, Universitas Sebelas Maret.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Djuharie, Otong Setiawan. 2009. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Teknik dan Panduan Menulis Melalui Eksplorasi Model dan Latihan</span><span class="font1">. Bandung: Yrama Widya</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Emilia, Emi. et al. 2018. An Analysis of Cohesion of Exposition Texts, An &nbsp;Indonesian</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Context. Indonesian journal of applied linguistics. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Universitas &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Pendidikan</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Indonesia. 7(3), pp. 515-523.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Vol. 30 No.1</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Halliday, Michael dan Ruqaiya Hason. 1992. Bahasa KOnteks dan Teks: Aspek-aspek Bahasa dalam Pandangan Semiotik Sosial (terjemahan). Yogyakarta. Gajah Mada.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Larson, Mildred L. 1998. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Meaning Based Translation: A Guide to Cross-Language Equivalence,</span><span class="font1"> New York: University Press of America.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Lungguh, Ariang, Bangga. 2013. An Investigation Of Theme And Theme Progression Of Students’ Exposition Text (A Case Study In A State University In Bandung). English Education Department Faculty Of Language And Arts Education Indonesia University Of Education.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Mary L. Gavin, MD. 2018. &nbsp;“</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">When Being</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Overweight is a Health Problem”. </span><a href="https://kidshealth.org/en/teens/obesity.html"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://kidshealth.org/en/teens/obesity.html</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">Moeloeng. L.J. 2001. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Metodologi Penelitian Kualitatif</span><span class="font1">, Bandung: Remaja Rosda karya.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Molina, L., and Albir, H. 2002. Translation Technique Revisited: A Dynamic and Functionalist Approach. Meta, 47(4), 498512.</span><a href="https://doi.org/10.9202/008033ar"><span class="font1"> </span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://doi.org/10.9202/008033ar</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">Newmark, P. 1988. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">A Textbook of Translation</span><span class="font1">. New York: Prentice-Hall International.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Reiss, Katharina. &nbsp;2000. &nbsp;“Type, &nbsp;Kind &nbsp;and</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Individuality of Text. Decision making in translation”. &nbsp;Dalam &nbsp;venuti &nbsp;(ed.) &nbsp;</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">The</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Translation Studies Reader</span><span class="font1">. London and New York: Routledge</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Siahaan. 2009. Writing II. FKIP University HKBP Nommensen. Pematang Siantar</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Sodiq, Jafar. 2019. An Ananlysis of the Translation of Processes of the Expository Texts in ask Barbara: The 100 Most-Asked Question About Love, Sex, and relationships: A Sistemic Functional Linguistics Approach. Dissertation of doctorate Program of Surakarta Sebelas Maret University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Sudaryanto. 2015. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Metode Linguistik</span><span class="font1">. Yogyakarka: Gadjah Mada University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Sutopo, H.B. 2006. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Metodologi Penelitian Kualitatif.</span><span class="font1"> Surakarta: UNS</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">38</span></p>