---
layout: full_article
title: "the Translation Methods of Mangupa Text From Mandailing Language Into Indonesian"
author: "Ulfah Nurjannah Nasution, Mayasari Mayasari"
categories: linguistika
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/full-89366 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/id-89366"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/full-89366"  
comments: true
---

<p><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/linguistika/"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/linguistika/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">DOI: </span><a href="https://doi.org/10.24843/ling.2023.v30.i02.p01"><span class="font1">https://doi.org/10.24843/ling.2023.v30.i02.p01</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">LINGUISTIKA, SEPTEMBER 2023</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">p-ISSN: 0854-9613 e-ISSN: 2656-6419</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 30 No.2</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Translation Methods of Mangupa Text from Mandailing Language into Indonesian</span></h1>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Ulfah Nurjannah Nst <sup>1</sup>, Mayasari <sup>2</sup></span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3"><sup>1,2</sup> English Department, faculty of language and communication, Universitas Harapan Medan, Indonesia e-mail:</span><a href="mailto:nurjannahnst27@gmail.com"><span class="font3"> </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">nurjannahnst27@gmail.com</span><span class="font3"> </span></a><span class="font3">,</span><a href="mailto:mayasaribuya1989@gmail.com"><span class="font3"> </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">mayasaribuya1989@gmail.com</span></a></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstrak –</span><span class="font3">Mangupa text can be regarded as a cultural text because the text is a text or written material that reflects a way of life that is owned by a group of people. This research is qualitative research and the method is document (text) analysis, data analysis uses translation theory by Newmark. This theory divides translation into eight methods: Word for Word Translation, Literal Translation, Free Translation, Adaptation Translation, Idiomatic Translation, Faithful Translation, Semantic Translation, and Communicative Translation. The findings of the research showed 23 text in a Mangupa Text from Mandailing Language Into Indonesian that is exactly divisible for by the use of Newmark’s theory that the translation method which is the most frequently used by the translator is semantic translation and word for word translation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Keywords : </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Culture, mandailingnese, translation methods, mangupa</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstrak --</span><span class="font3">Teks mangupa dapat dikatakan sebagai teks budaya karena teks merupakan teks atau bahan tertulis yang mencerminkan suatu pandangan hidup yang dimiliki oleh sekelompok orang. Penelitian ini merupakan penelitian kualitatif dengan metode analisis dokumen (teks), analisis data menggunakan teori penerjemahan oleh Newmark. Teori ini membagi penerjemahan menjadi delapan metode: Penerjemahan Kata demi Kata, Penerjemahan Literal, Penerjemahan Bebas, Penerjemahan Adaptasi, Penerjemahan Idiomatik, Penerjemahan Setia, Penerjemahan Semantik, dan Penerjemahan Komunikatif. Hasil penelitian menunjukkan 23 teks dalam Teks Mangupa Berbahasa Mandailing Ke Bahasa Indonesia yang tepat dapat dibagi berdasarkan penggunaan teori Newmark bahwa metode penerjemahan yang paling sering digunakan oleh penerjemah adalah penerjemahan semantik dan penerjemahan kata demi kata.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Kata Kunci </span><span class="font3">: </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">budaya, suku mandailing, metode terjemahan, mangupa</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 30 No.2</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Introduction</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Indonesia is culturally rich. Indonesia art and culture are intertwined with religion and age-old traditions from the time of early migrants with western thoughts brought by Portuguese traders and Dutch colonist. The basic principles which guide life included the concept of mutual assistance or </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">“Gotong royong”</span><span class="font3"> and consultations or </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">“musyawarah”</span><span class="font3"> to arrive at a consesus or </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">“mufakat”</span><span class="font3"> derived from rural life, this system is still very much in use in community life throughout the country.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Though the legal system is based on the old Dutch penal code, social life as well as the rites of passage are founded on customary or </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">“adat”</span><span class="font3"> law which differs from area to area. </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">“Adat”</span><span class="font3"> law has a binding impact on Indonesian life and it may be concluded that this law has been instrumental in maintaining equal rights for women in the community. Religious influences on the community are variously evident from island to island.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Mangupa text needs to be translated because it contains the elements of Mandailingnese culture that is not found in foreign culture and the translation of this text into Indonesian is badly needed so that Mandailingnese culture will be well known to the indonesian residents.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Brown (in Nasution, 2011:15) asserts, “A language is a part of a culture and a culture is a part of a language; the two are intricately interwoven such that one can not separate the two without losing the significances of either language or culture&quot;.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Language is the main topic of any discussion about translation. It is a way to able to do an interaction with other people. The Oxford dictionary (2008:247) defines “language as a system of communication in speech and writing used by people of a particular country”. It means that every country has its own language. Since every country has its own language, translation is a very important thing that is needed in interaction.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Generally, translation is transferring an idea, knowledge or purpose from Source Language (SL) to Target Language (TL). Catford defines that</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">translation is an operation performed on languages: a process of substituting a text in one language for a text in another. Newmark (1988:7) states, “Translation is a craft consisting in the attempt to replace a written message and/or statement in one language by the same message and/or statement in another language.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">On his theory Newmark argues that “a general” theory cannot propose a single method, but must be concerned with the full range of text types and their corresponding translation criteria as well a major variables involved”. While translation methods according to newmark in A Textbook of Translation explain “ While translation methods relate to whole texts, translation procedures are used for sentences and the smaller units of language”.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Newmark’s distinguishes eight methods of translation. The method can be classified into two : four of them are oriented in source language (SL emphasis) and the other four are oriented in target language (TL emphasis) there are eight types of translation method: word-for-word literal, faithful, semantic, adaptation, free, idiomatic, and communicative.” ). Newmark puts them in the form of flattened V diagram bellows:</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">SL emphasis</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">TL emphasis</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Word for word</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Adaptation</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Literal</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Free</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">Faithful</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">Idiomatic</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font3">Semantic Communicative</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">According to Nababan (2003: 86) the main point are: 1) the accuracy of transfering the message. It means the original message cannot be changed, added or deducated. 2) The accuracy of expressing the message into the target language. It concerns about the way the original message is composed in target language structurally. 3) The naturalness of translating the source language into target language. In transfering the original message, the translation should give attention intensively to the naturalness of the target language. From the statement above, it can be concluded that the accuracy of a translation is</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 30 No.2</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">related to the accuracy of the transfer original message or meaning contained in the source language text into the target language text.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>Communicative Translation</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">Attempts to render exact contextual meaning of the original in such a way that both content and language are readily acceptable and comprehensible to the readership.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">For Example : </span><span class="font3">SL : Beware of dog!</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">TL : </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Awas ada anjing!</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">This research will be conducted by using descriptive qualitative. Qualitative research is understanding people from their own frames of reference and experiencing reality as they experience it (Corbin &amp;&nbsp;Strauss, 2008). Descriptive research is research that seeks to describe and interpret something, such as existing conditions or relationships, developing opinions, ongoing processes, consequences or effects that occur, or about ongoing trends. “That is a research approach where the data collected are in the form of words, pictures and numbers. These data can be obtained from interviews, field notes, photos, video tapes, other documentation. (Moleong, 2000:6).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This research is achieved by collecting, rewriting, categorizing, analyzing data drawing conclusions to understanding the translation methods used in Mangupa texts by finding out the translation methods used. This means that the data comes from Mandailing and Indonesian texts.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">In collecting the data, there are assorted step to take. Firstly, the researcher meet the native speaker to ask about the contents of “Mangupa Text”. Secondly, the researcher watches several videos as a reference and addition to the contents of “Mangupa Text”. Then thirdly, the researcher read</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">and find related data from books, journals and articles related to the theory of translation methods. Then the researcher will inventory all the utterances in the Mandailing and Indonesian text of “Mangupa Text”, and grouping them to the types of translation methods. Finally all the collected data will be selected and organized accordance to its use to carry on with further analysis.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Result and Discussion</span><br><br><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark10"></a>3.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Result</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">This research use content analysis of translation method because all the data comes from Mangupa Text from Mandailing Language and Indonesian. All of the utterances in the Mandailing and Indonesian text are analyzed in this research.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark11"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark12"></a>3.1.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Word for word Translation</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">This is often demonstrated as interlinear translation, with the TL immediately below the SL text. In which source langauge word is translated singly by their most common meanings which can also be out of context. Usually, a translator just transfers the meaning of each word based on the word order and part of speech of the source language unless, the structure of SL have same structure with TL.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">For Example: </span><span class="font3">SL : I like noodles</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">TL : Saya suka mie</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Analysis data 1 :</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">SL : Di jolo ni hita adong i baen upah-upah</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">TL : </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Di depan kita ada dibuat sebuah Upah-upah</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The data above include as word for word method of translation, because it follows the sequence of sentences in the source language. Because this method is commonly used to translate problematic words, it is often used to improve the structure of the language that wants to be discussed with the structure of language or the translation of sources text containing single words.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark13"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark14"></a>Analysis data 2 :</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">SL : Dohot i lehen ma ia kesehatan</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">TL : </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Dengan diberi juga kesehatan</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 30 No.2</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The data above included as word for word translation, because the utterance “Dohot i lehen ma ia Kesehatan” when it is translating in TL “Dengan diberi juga kesehatan” this method applied perfectly to improve the structure of the language or the translation of the sources of text containing single words, so that this method is generally used to translate difficult word.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark15"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark16"></a>Analysis data 3 :</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">SL : On pe napola ginjang hata na be</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">TL : </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Mungkin cukup sampai disini perkataan ini</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The utterance ”On pe napola ginjang hata na be” is considered when using this method word for word because it is maintaining the order of sentences in the source language, so when it is translating in TL is “Mungkin cukup sampai disini perkataan ini”. Because this method applied perfectly to improve the structure of the language or the translation of the sources of text containing single words, so that this method is generally used to translate difficult word.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark17"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark18"></a>Analysis data 4 :</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">SL : Nadong udang na bengkok</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">TL : </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Tidak ada udang yang tak bengkok</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The data above include as word for word method of translation, because it follows the sequence of sentences in the source language. Because this method is commonly used to translate problematic words, it is often used to improve the structure of the language that wants to be discussed with the structure of language or the translation of sources text containing single words.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark19"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark20"></a>Analysis data 5 :</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">SL : Poken di panyambungan ara mian na Dikoto luhur. Rapmangido ita Tutuhan Sai salamat panjang umur</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">TL : </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Pekan di panyambungan ramai-ramaina di waktu dzuhur. Bersama kita berdoa kepada Tuhan semoga selamat panjang umur</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The data above include as word for word method of translation, because it follows the sequence of sentences in the source language. Because this method is commonly used to translate problematic words, it is often used to improve the structure of the language that wants to be discussed with the structure of language or the translation of sources text containing single words.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark21"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark22"></a>3.1.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Literal Translation</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The SL grammatical constructions are converted to their nearest TL equivalents but the lexical words are again translated singly, out of context. In which the SL grammataical constructions are converted to their nearest TL equivalence, but the lexical words are translated singly, out of context. Literal translation is between translating word for word translation and free translation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">For Example : </span><span class="font3">SL : The thief was sent to the prison</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">TL : </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Pencuri itu dikirim ke penjara</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark23"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark24"></a>Analysis data 6 :</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">SL : Nadia mai na giot pa gogohon asa mulak tondi tu badan</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">TL : </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Yang mana bertujuan untuk menguatkan agar jiwa diberi kekuatan kembali</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The data above includes the literal translation approach. Because the utterance translates as well as with word for word only to better adapt the order of words in language translation. The utterance “Nadia mai na giot pa gogohon asa mulak tondi tu badan” is translated “Yang mana bertujuan untuk menguatkan agar jiwa diberi kekuatan kembali”. The researcher has changed the structure of source langauge into a target language. However, the words and style of text in the SL are still delivered in the TL.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 30 No.2</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark25"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark26"></a>Analysis data 7 :</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">SL : Adong pe hita baen upah-upah on asso bormat tu hita na dison</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">TL : </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Adapun kita buat upah-upah ini agar kiranya kita juga yang berada disini mendapatkan doa terbaik juga</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This data include into literal translation, because grammatical constructs are changed as close as possible to their equivalent in TL. The utterance “ Adong pe hita baen upah-upah on asso bormat tu hita na dison” is translated “Adapun kita buat upah-upah ini agar kiranya kita juga yang berada disini mendapatkan doa terbaik juga” the reseacher has changed the structure of SL into a TL structure. This is done at the beginning of the translation process to indicate the problem to be solved.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark27"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark28"></a>3.1.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Faithful Translation</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Attempts to reproduce the precise contextual meaning of original within the contraints of the TL grammatical structure.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">For Example : </span><span class="font3">SL : Born without drims, he sent to special school</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">TL : </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Lahir tanpa lengan lengan, dia dikirim ke sekolah khusus</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark29"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark30"></a>Analysis data 8 :</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">SL : Napolang ginjang hatana be tai doa dohot usaho akkon do ginjang saginjang ni ngolu on.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">TL : </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Mungkin kalimat ini tak sepanjang apa yang di harapkan akan tetapi doa dan usah haruslah panjang sampai sepanjang kehidupan yang ada</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The data above include as faithful translation, in the utterance “Napolang ginjang hatana be tai doa dohot usaho akkon do ginjang saginjang ni ngolu on” is translated “Mungkin kalimat ini tak sepanjang apa yang diharapkan akan tetapi doa dan usaha haruslah panjang sampai sepanjang kehidupan”. This method tries to produce the right contextual meaning in SL with limited TL</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">grammatical structure. The translation is endeavored to be truly faithful to the intent and realization of the SL text.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark31"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark32"></a>Analysis data 9 :</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">SL : Horas, Horas, Horas</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">TL : </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Horas, Horas, Horas</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The data above include as faithful translation, in the utterance “Horas, Horas, Horas” is translated “Horas, Horas, Horas”. This method tries to produce the right contextual meaning in SL with limited TL grammatical structure. The translation is endeavored to be truly faithful to the intent and realization of the SL text.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark33"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark34"></a>3.1.4 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Semantic Translation</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Differ from faithful translation only as far as it must take more account of the aesthetic value of the SL, compromising on meaning where appropriate so that no assonance, word play or repitition jars in the finished version. Tries to transferring the contextual meaning of the SL to the nearest semantic and syntactical construction of the TL.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">For Example : </span><span class="font3">SL : She is Shopaholic.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">TL : </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Dia adalah orang yang gemar belanja.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark35"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark36"></a>Analysis data 10 :</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">SL : Keselamatan dohot i pamura rasoki sian Tuhan ta na markuasoi</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">TL : </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">keselamatan dan semoga di murahkan rezeki dari Tuhan yang Maha Esa</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">From the data above, the researcher has changed the meaning from SL into TL. The utterance “ Tuhan ta na markuasoi” with the real meaning “Tuhan yang Berkuasa” has changed into “Tuhan yang Maha Esa”. This method is more flexible because this method consider the aesthetic value of SL text that adjust the meaning, there are</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 30 No.2</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">adjustments to the readers. This method allows creativity does not follow 100% fidelity to SL text.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark37"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark38"></a>Analysis data 11 :</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">SL : Sahata mahita sude semoga nian hata-hata on menjadi doa dohot I Kabul kon Tuhan ta i</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">TL : </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Satu perkataan lah kita semua dan menjadi Doa serta di kabulkan oleh Tuhan yang Maha Esa</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The utterance “sahata mahita sude semoga nian hata-hata on menjadi doa dohot i kabul kon Tuhan ta i” is considered when using this method semantic translation, so when is translating in TL is “Satu perkataan lah kita semua dan menjadi doa seta di kabulkan oleh Tuhan yang Maha Esa”. Because this method more flexible than faithful translation method. This method consider the aesthetic value of SL text that adjust the meaning, there are adjustments to the readers. This method allows creativity does not follow 100% fidelity to SL text.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark39"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark40"></a>Analysis data 12 :</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">SL : Salumpat sapa daili, sapangambil saendege Sapinggan sapanganan</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">TL : </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Satu tempat pengambilan satu injakan, Satu piring bersama</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The utterance “salumpat sapa daili, sapangambil saendege, sapinggan sapanganan” has literal meaning “satu tempat berlindung yang sama, satu tujuan dan satu piring makan berdua” but is translated “Satu tempat pengambilan satu injakan satu piring bersama” the researcher has to changed the meaning to follow the TL grammatical. This method consider the aesthetic value of SL text that adjust the meaning, there are adjustments to the readers. This method allows creativity does not follow 100% fidelity to SL text.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Analysis data 13 :</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">SL : Tinggalkon ma amang adat na poso Madung sandang adat matobang</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">TL : </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Anakku! Tinggalkan kebisaan muda Dipundak mu sekarang kamu pria yang sudah menikah</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The data above include as semantic translaion. Because the utterance “Tinggalkon ma amang adat na poso. Madung sandang adat matobang” is translated “Amang, tinggalkan kebiasaan muda dipundak mu sekarang kamu pria yang sudah menikah” the literal mening is “ Amang, tinggalkan perilaku muda, dipundak mu sekarang kamu membawa adat pria yang sudah menikah” the researcher has to changed the meaning to follow the TL grammatical. This method consider the aesthetic value of SL text that adjust the meaning, there are adjustments to the readers. This method allows creativity does not follow 100% fidelity to SL text.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark41"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark42"></a>Analysis data 14 :</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">SL : Tinggalkon ma inang adat ma bujing Madung jujung adat matobang</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">TL : Anakku! Tinggalkan kebiasaan muda Dikepala mu sekarang kamu wanita yang sudah menikah</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The data above include as semantic translaion. Because the utterance “Tinggalkon ma inang adat ma bujing. Madung jujung adat matobang” is translated “Inang, tinggalkan kebiasaan muda dikepala mu sekarang kamu wanita yang sudah menikah” the literal mening is “Inang, tinggalkan perilaku muda yang menggembirakan, dikepala mu sekarang kamu membawa kepribadian yang sudah menikah” the researcher has to changed the meaning to follow the TL grammatical. This method consider the aesthetic value of SL text that adjust the meaning, there are adjustments to the readers. This method allows creativity does not follow 100% fidelity to SL text.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Analysis data 15 :</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 30 No.2</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">SL : Sira nasasumbiga inganan nadi bulung salungsung. Tuhan tai namarnida arane pangalaho Muyu madung marunjung</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">TL : </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Garam harga nya murah namun begitu Banyak kegunaan nya. Perjalanan kalian Sudah berakhir dari masa muda ke masa tua</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The data above include as semantic translaion. Because the utterance “Sira nasasumbiga inganan nadi bulung salungsung, Tuhan tai namarnida arane pangalaho muyu madung” is translated “Garam harga nya murah namun begitu banyak kegunaannya. Perjalanan kalian sudah berakhir dari masa muda ke masa tua” the researcher has to changed the meaning to follow the TL grammatical. This method consider the aesthetic value of SL text that adjust the meaning, there are adjustments to the readers. This method allows creativity does not follow 100% fidelity to SL text.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark43"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark44"></a>Analysis data 16 :</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">SL : Hambeng dimandurana, namaranak kon andurian. Baendenggan do namo dimulana saidenggan musema tuhapudian</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">TL : </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Karena sepasang pengantin yang baik dimulainya mudah-mudahan baik pula dibelakang hari</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The data above include as semantic translaion. Because the utterance “Hambeng dimandurana, namaranak kon andurian.Baendenggan do namo dimulana saidenggan musema tuhapudian” is translated “Karena sepasang pengantin yang baik dimulainya mudah-mudahan baik pula dibelakang hari” the researcher has to changed the meaning to follow the TL grammatical. This method consider the aesthetic value of SL text that adjust the meaning, there are adjustments to the readers. This method allows creativity does not follow 100% fidelity to SL text.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark45"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark46"></a>Analysis data 17 :</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">SL : Malos dingin dingin o banon tu sipogu Horagnian tondi mandingin saipir tondi matohu</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">TL : </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Mudah mudahan setiap pelaksanaan tadi Rukun damai dan bersatu antara dua bela pihak</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The data above include as semantic translaion. Because the utterance “Malos dingin dingin o banon tu sipogu horagnian tondi mandingin saipir tondi matohu” is translated “Mudah mudahan setiap pelaksanaan tadi rukun damai dan bersatu antara dua bela pihak” the researcher has to changed the meaning to follow the TL grammatical. This method consider the aesthetic value of SL text that adjust the meaning, there are adjustments to the readers. This method allows creativity does not follow 100% fidelity to SL text.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark47"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark48"></a>3.1.5 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Adaptation Translation</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">This is the freest form of translation. It is used mainly for plays (comedies) and poetry, themes, characters, plots are usually preserved the SL cultures converted to the TL culture and the text written.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">For Example : </span><span class="font3">SL : the rising sun is found not to be rising sun. It is the world which goes around.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">TL : </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Matahari terbit ternyata bukan matahari terbit. Dunialah yang sebenarnya mengorbit.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark49"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark50"></a>Analysis data 18 :</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">SL : Mohon maaf ma tu akka hita na dison</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">TL : </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Mohon maaf kepada kita semua yang ada disini</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">From the utterance “Mohon maaf” is adapted to TL language. So the data include as adaptation methods, because this method is the freest and closest form of translation to TL. The background and social content are adapted to TL culture. This method places more emphasis on the content of the message while the form is adjusted to the needs of the TL reader.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 30 No.2</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark51"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark52"></a>3.1.6 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Free Translation</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Reproduces the matter without the manner or content without the form of the original. This translation produces the translated text without the style, form, or content of the original text. Also, this translation preserves the meaning of the source language but uses natural forms in the target language.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">For Example : </span><span class="font3">SL : Killing two birds with one stone.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">TL : </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Sambil menyelam minum air.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark53"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark54"></a>Analysis data 19 :</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">SL : Molo adong adong hata na salah dohot perlakuan na tarbaen</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">TL : Jika ada perlakuan yang tidak baik dan salah Serta kelakuan yang terbuat</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The data above include as free translation, in the utterance “Molo adong adong hata na salah dohot perlakuan na tarbaen” is translated “Jika ada perlakuan yang tidak baik dan salah serta kelakuan yang terbuat” because free translation reproduces the matter, without manner or content without the original form. Usually this translation is a much longer paraphrase than the original. Which is often verbose, redundant, and not even a meaning at all.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark55"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark56"></a>Analysis data 20 :</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">SL : Ibaen namartoba libung ulang nian Marumbak tupaya, malo-malo amu Sumambut lidung ulangon sugari Maluntak magaya</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">TL : </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Pandailah memasukan diri jangan Sampai terjadinya pertengkaran, Agar keluarga menjadi harmonis sampai ke belakang hari</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The data above include as free translaion. Because the utterance has the literal meaning “pandai diri dalam menarik hati jangan sampai salah berujar dan juga bergaya, dikarenakan meminta keluarga rukun damai” because free translation reproduces the matter, without manner or content without the</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">original form. Usually this translation is a much longer paraphrase than the original. Which is often verbose, redundant, and not even a meaning at all.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark57"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark58"></a>3.1.7 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Idiomatic Translation</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Reproduces the message of the original but tends to distort nuances of meaning by prefering colloquialism and idioms where these do not exist in the original.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">For Example : </span><span class="font3">SL : Feeling blue</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">TL : </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Merasa sedih</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark59"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark60"></a>Analysis data 21 :</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">SL : Dijujar horambir poso Mangihut saludang natobang</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">TL : </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Buah kelapa muda jatuh Batang tua dirobohkan</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The data above include idiomatic translation. Becauce from the utterance “Dijujar horambir poso” is translated “Buah kelapa muda jatuh” a word buah kelapa muda describes a young personality that must be left behind. The utterance “Mangihut saludang natobang” is translated “Batang tua dirobohkan” it means to describe an old personality. This translation reproduces the original message, but tends to change the nuances of meaning by using more colloquial language and idioms that are not in the SL text.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark61"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark62"></a>Analysis data 22 :</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">SL : Tal duskom ma giring-giring Laho mamasukkon golang-golang</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">TL : </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Lepaskan gelang gemerincing mu Ketika memakai gelang emas mu</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The data above include idiomatic translation. Becauce from the utterance “Tal duskom ma giring-giring” is translated “lepaskan gelang gemerincing mu” this word describes a young habits who is relaxed and playful. The utterance “Laho mamasukkon goalng-golang” is translated</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 30 No.2</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">“ketika memakai gelang emas mu” it means to describe an old habits. This translation reproduces the original message, but tends to change the nuances of meaning by using more colloquial language and idioms that are not in the SL text.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark63"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark64"></a>3.1.8 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Communicative Translation</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Attempts to render exact contextual meaning of the original in such a way that both content and language are readily acceptable and comprehensible to the readership.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">For Example : </span><span class="font3">SL : Beware of dog!</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">TL : </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Awas ada anjing!</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark65"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark66"></a>Analysis data 23 :</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">SL : Songoni hu sudahi hata-hata kon</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">TL : </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Beginilah maka akan saya sudahi perkataan ini</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The data above include as communicative translation. From the utterance “Songoni hu sudahi hata-hata kon” is translated “Beginilah maka akan saya sudahi perkataan ini” the only translation that fulfills the purpose of translation above is semantic and communicative translation. Semantic translation is used for “expressive” text and communicative translation for “informative” and “vocative” text. “Hu sudahi” is translated “saya sudahi” to inform the audience the opening remarks of the costumary holder has been completed.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">3.2 Discussion</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">No</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Translation methods</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Quantity</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">1.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Semantic Translation</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">8</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">2.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Word for word</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">5</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">translation</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">3</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Idiom translation</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">2</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">4</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Literal translation</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">2</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">5</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Free translation</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">2</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td rowspan="2" style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">6</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Adaptation translation</span></p></td><td rowspan="2" style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">1</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Communicative</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">7</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">translation</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">1</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Faithful transaltion</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">1</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Table 1. translation methods use in the mangupa texs</span></p>
<div>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">8</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<p><span class="font3">The researcher found that the translation method which is the most frequently used by the translator is semantic translation and word for word translation. Many reasons are behind that, first, because it is an applicable method and easy to conduct. Added the audience were mostly student, it is important to make them understand text easily using translation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Literal translation method is more frequently used because the translator tries to keep the meaning in the source language coverts construction of the source language into intended construction of the target language.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Adaptation, communicative and faithful translation is less frequently used because the researcher tries to understand the mechanics and find the equivalent word from source language or to construe a difficult text as a pre translation process.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 30 No.2</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Free translation method is reproducing the matter or the context without the form of the original. Compared to literal translation, due to the reason of preserving mainly the message of source language not the construction or style.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Idiomatic translation method is used to reproduce the message of the source language but tend to distort nuances of meaning by preferring colloquialism and idioms.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark67"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark68"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">After analyzing all the data above, the conclusion of the research related to the translation methods of mangupa text. In order to identify implicitly, the writer uses the translation methods based on peter Newmark's theory. Of all the studies and this one finding 23 text in a Mangupa Text from Mandailing Language Into Indonesian that is exactly divisible for by the use of Newmark’s theory that have eight translations, and from translation word for word, faithful transaltion adaptation translation, free translation, idiomatic translation , literal translation ,semantic translation, and communicative translation the researcher discovered that it has a translation in the text different Newmark’s theory that every word and sentence contained in the Mangupa text has its own translation. The studies that the researcher do especially to others researcher this Adat text can help the other researcher translation to understand about the translation methods that is used in Adat text.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Life of Ms Wiz. Research Paper. Semarang: UNNES.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Awalita, N. F. (2014). A Translation Analysis Of Imperative Sentences And Quality Level In The Movie Avatar: &nbsp;The Last Airbender (A</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Politenessapproach).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Daulay, I., Khoirot. 2021. Interpersonal Meaning of Mangupa Towards Dalihan Na Tolu Tapanuli Selatan In Medan. SALTel Journal Vol.4, 42-48.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Darma, Y. A. (2007). METODE PEMBELAJARAN PENERJEMAHAN. Jurnal Pendidikan Dan Kebudayaan, 13(67), 678-695.</span></p>
<p><a href="https://doi.org/10.24832/jpnk.v13i67.391"><span class="font2">https://doi.org/10.24832/jpnk.v13i67.391</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">Nababan, Rudolf. 2003. Teori Menerjemah Bahasa Inggris. Yogyakarta: Pustaka Pelajar</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Nababan, Mangatur, Nuraeni Ardiana and Sumardono.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">2012. Pengembangan Model Penelitian Kualitas Penerjemahan. Artikel Kajian Linguistik dan Sastra, vol, 24, No. 1, Juni 2012.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Nugraha, A., Nugroho, M. A. ., &amp;&nbsp;Rahman, Y. 2017. English – Indonesian Translation methods in the short story A Blunder by Anton Chekhov. Indonesian EFL Journal, 3 (1), 79-86.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Ordudari, M. 2007. Translation Procedures, Strategies and Methods”. Translation Journal Vol 11 No.3</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Sari, Zulfida. 2016. Translation Methods of The Translation of Sapardi Djoko Damono’s Poems In English. MEDAN : USU</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Taylor. S. J., Bogdan. R., DeVault. M. L., 2016. Introduction to Qualitaive Research Methods. Canada : John Wiley &amp;&nbsp;Sons.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark69"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark70"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Daftar Pustaka</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Akbari, M. 2013. Strategies for Translating Idioms. Journal of Academic and Applied Studies, 3/8. Pp. 32-41. ISSN 1925-931X.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Anari, Salar Manafi &amp;&nbsp;Bouali, Zahra. 2009. Naturalness and Accuracy in English Translation of Hafiz. Journal of Teaching as a Foreign Language and Literature, Islamic Azad University, North Tehran Branch. Vol. 1. No. 3.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Ardhani, Tommy. 2015. Translation Strategies Used in The English-Indonesia Translation of The Secret</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">88</span></p>