---
layout: full_article
title: "The Analysis of Three Dimensions of The Main Character in Percy Jackson"
author: "Gres Rewung Kadmaerubun, I Gusti Ayu Gede Sosiowati, I Komang Sumaryana Putra"
categories: linguistika
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/full-86989 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/id-86989"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/full-86989"  
comments: true
---

<p><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/linguistika/"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/linguistika/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">DOI: </span><a href="https://doi.org/10.24843/ling.2023.v30.i01.p04"><span class="font1">https://doi.org/10.24843/ling.2023.v30.i01.p04</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">LINGUISTIKA, MARET 2023</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">p-ISSN: 0854-9613 e-ISSN: 2656-6419</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 30 No.1</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>The Analysis of Three Dimensions of The Main Character in Percy Jackson</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">Gres Rewung Kadmaerubun<sup>1</sup>, I Gusti Ayu Gede Sosiowati<sup>2</sup>, I Komang Sumaryana Putra<sup>3 </sup>English Department, Faculty of Humanities, Udayana University, Bali, Indonesia <sup>1,2,3 </sup>e-mail:</span><a href="mailto:1valenthinagrace14@gmail.com"><span class="font2"> <sup>1</sup></span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">valenthinagrace14@gmail.com</span><span class="font2">,</span></a><span class="font2"> </span><a href="mailto:sosiowati@yahoo.com"><span class="font2"><sup>2</sup></span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">sosiowati@yahoo.com</span><span class="font1">,</span></a><span class="font1"> </span><a href="mailto:sumaryana_putra@unud.ac.id"><span class="font2"><sup>3</sup></span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">sumaryana_putra@unud.ac.id</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstract— </span><span class="font2">The aim of this study is to analyze the three dimensions of the main character in Percy Jackson and the Olympians: The Lightning Thief movie. The data which are used in this study are taken from a movie entitled Percy Jackson and the Olympians: The Lightning Thief. This study applied a theory proposed by Egri (1960) to analyze the three dimensions of the character and a theory proposed by Kenney (1966) to classify the method of characterization into five methods: Discursive Method, Dramatic Method, Contextual Method, Mixing Method, and Characters on the other Characters Method. The data were collected by using documentation method and note taking technique. Descriptive and qualitative method were used to analyze the data. Based on the analysis, it shows that the main character in Percy Jackson and the Olympians: The Lightning Thief movie is Percy Jackson. The findings of this study indicate that in the movie, it shows all of the three dimensions of the character. There is also method of characterization used by the author in the movie.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Keywords: </span><span class="font2">main character, three dimensions, methods of characterization</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstrak— </span><span class="font2">Tujuan dari penelitian ini adalah untuk menganalisis tiga dimensi karakter utama dalam film Percy Jackson and the Olympians: The Lightning Thief. Data yang digunakan dalam penelitian ini diambil dari film yang berjudul Percy Jackson and the Olympians: The Lightning Thief. Penelitian ini menerapkan teori yang dikemukakan oleh Egri (1960) untuk menganalisis tiga dimensi tokoh dan teori yang dikemukakan oleh Kenney (1966) untuk mengklasifikasikan metode penokohan menjadi lima metode: Metode Diskursif, Metode Dramatis, Metode Kontekstual, Metode Pencampuran, dan Metode Karakter pada Karakter lainnya. Pengumpulan data dilakukan dengan menggunakan metode dokumentasi dan teknik catat. Metode deskriptif dan kualitatif digunakan untuk menganalisis data. Berdasarkan analisis, terlihat bahwa tokoh utama dalam film Percy Jackson and the Olympians: The Lightning Thief adalah Percy Jackson. Hasil penelitian menunjukkan bahwa dalam film ini, terdapat ketiga dimensi karakter. Ada juga metode penokohan yang digunakan oleh penulis dalam film tersebut.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Kata kunci: </span><span class="font2">karakter utama, tiga dimensi, metode karakterisasi</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 30 No.1</span></p>
<div>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Introduction</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Literature is a set of artwork or the art of language and usually used as a medium to express an emotion or feelings of a human being. It is the inspiration of life expressed in an artistic form. Literature is quite another way to express world around it through our imagination (Jones, 1968). There are many different forms of literature such as poetry, plays, or novels. According to Rene Wellek and Austin Warren (1962), literature has three major genres, they are drama, poetry, and prose fiction. Through reading a wide variety of stories someone could enter many different imaginative worlds, in the process of enlarging and deepening their perception of the world (Di Yanni, 2001). Literature could affects the feelings and outlook of a person which comes from information, understanding about life and moral teaching from the literary works. In addition, with literature, the author can entertain people and make connoisseurs enjoy the literary work. Lately, movie become popular and it is loved by many people. Movie is one of the literary works because it could give the audience a sense of satisfaction when watching movies, which is also a function of literary works. Movie also contains a series of stories of a person's life with people in the surrounding environment and accentuates the character and nature of each character.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In this study, the researcher is interested in analyzing between the characterization and methods of characterization of the main character in movie because that becomes one difficulty in analyzing literary works. In order to minimize the difficulty, the researcher analyzed and focused only on the characterization and methods of characterization of the main character in a movie because it is more essence and easier to be analyzed. The movie that was analyzed is one written by Rick Riordan entitled Percy Jackson and the Olympians: The Lightning Thief. The movie will be analyzed based on the character, in this case, the main character. The reason to analyze the main character was because the main character takes an important part as the main focus from the whole story which therefore makes it occupy the central position in the story. This movie is interesting to be analyzed because the author puts</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<div>
<p><span class="font2">sensitive issues related to physiological, sociological, and psychological aspects in which they appear to build the characterization of a character.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Based on the background of the study, the problem of study are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">1.</span><span class="font2"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What are the physiological, sociological, and the psychological dimensions of the main character described in the movie Percy Jackson and the Olympians: The Lightning Thief?</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">2.</span><span class="font2"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What characterization method are used to describe the main character in the movie Percy Jackson and the Olympians: The Lightning Thief?</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The aims of this study are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">a.</span><span class="font2"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To describe the physiological, sociological, and the psychological dimensions of the main character in the movie Percy Jackson and the Olympians: The Lightning Thief.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">b.</span><span class="font2"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To analyze the methods of characterization that was used by the author to describe the main character in the movie Percy Jackson and the Olympians: The Lightning Thief.</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Material and Method</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The movie that was analyzed and used as the data source is one written by Rick Riordan entitled Percy Jackson and the Olympians: The Lightning Thief. This is an adaptation of The Lightning Thief, the first book in the Percy Jackson &amp;&nbsp;The Olympians novel series. The movie was released on 12th February 2010, which tell us about the adventures of a young man named Percy Jackson, who is a demigod, half human and half god, in which he is the son of the god Poseidon and is accused of being Zeus's thief of lightning. He must face an adventure he never imagined to find and return the sacred object and prevent the war that almost broke out on Mount Olympus. The movie will be analyzed based on the character, in this case, the main character.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The data of this study was collected using documentation method. The step of method in collecting the data was by observing, collecting, categorizing and analyzing the physiological, sociological and the psychological dimensions of the main character and the methods of</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 30 No.1</span></p>
<div>
<p><span class="font2">characterization which presented the main character. These was the steps of technique in collecting the data such as: 1) Watching Percy Jackson and the Olympians: The Lightning Thief movie thoroughly in order to find out words, phrases, or sentences which contain the information of the physiological, sociological, and psychological dimensions of the main character and the methods of characterization that presenting the main character. 2) Marking the expression in which the words, phrases, or sentences are found and considered as the information of physiological, sociological, and psychological dimensions of the main character and the methods of characterization that presenting the main character. 3) Note taking technique was used to gather the data information of physiological, sociological, and psychological dimensions of the main character and the methods of characterization that presenting the main character. The method of analyzing the data was descriptive qualitative method based on theoretical basis for characterization. All the data was classified into certain categories. To determine the data belonging to certain point of analysis, the data was copied from the movie and categorized into physiological dimension, sociological dimension, and psychological dimension. And the data was analyzed based on the characterization theory available.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Finding and Discussion</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">This research focused on the analysis of physiological, sociological, and the psychological dimensions of the main character and the methods of characterization that was used by the author to describe the main character in the movie Percy Jackson and the Olympians: The Lightning Thief. The analysis was done by some theories that was adopted as the theoretical framework for this study. The theory of character dimensions proposed by Egri (1960:33) and the methods of characterization proposed by Kenney (1966:20).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>3.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Three Dimensions Analysis of The Main Character</span></h2></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Analysis of Physiological Dimension of the Main Character</span></p></li></ul>
</div><br clear="all">
<div>
<p><span class="font2">A. Percy has a good looking appearance Percy's father has an appearance that is no less good than Percy, he is also handsome so anyone who sees him could easily fall in love with him. This of course affects the physique of Percy as a descendant of his father, God Poseidon. Not only that, on his way to find the lightning bolt thief, he met an evil serpent goddess named Medusa who has the ability to turn anyone into stone just by looking at her. In this scene, Medusa also admitted that Percy does have a good appearance with blue eyes, young, and handsome face.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">(54:04-54:54)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">MEDUSA: I hear you have the lightning bolt. May I see it?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">PERCY: I don't have it!</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">MEDUSA: </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Let me see your eyes. I hear they're bluer than the Circassian Sea. </span><span class="font2">Open them, or my hungry babies will have to open them for you. </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">But it would be such a pity to destroy such a young and handsome face. </span><span class="font2">Stay with me, Percy. All you have to do is look</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Analysis of Sociological Dimension of the Main Character</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">A. Percy relationship with Grover Underwood</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Grover is the only supporting character who appears in almost every scene at the same time where Percy also appears from the beginning to the end of the movie. In this movie, Grover is introduced as a good friend of Percy who always accompanies him on every adventure. Not only as a schoolmate and Percy's best friend, unbeknownst to Percy, Grover is also a man-goat or known as a satyr. Grover turns out to be given the task of always accompanying and looking after Percy</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">(14:56-15:22)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">PERCY: Look, man, what's going on?</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 30 No.1</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">GROVER: Look, don't trust anyone, okay? Don't look at anybody, just keep walking!</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">PERCY: Why did Mr. Brunner ask you to watch me?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">GROVER: </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Because I'm your protector. </span><span class="font2">PERCY: Wait, wait, wait. Hold on. My protector? Are you kidding?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">GROVER: What, you think because I'm like this, I'm not capable of keeping you safe?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">PERCY: Maybe you're not seeing what I'm seeing. You have crutches!</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">GROVER: Look, </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">I would give my life to secure your well-being.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">PERCY: What are you talking about?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">What's going on?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">GROVER: We got to warn your mom. Come on, Perce. Come on!</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Analysis of Psychological Dimension of the Main Character</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">A. Percy is a caring person</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Percy is the type of person who has a very high sense of concern for people around him, both to his mother and also his close friends. For several times Percy always wants to stand up for his mother, Sally, as could be seen in the following data.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">(08:25-09:09)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">GABE: Woman!</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">SALLY: Hi, Gabe.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">GABE: Where's my beer?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">SALLY: It's in the fridge.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">GABE: So, what, it's supposed to magically float from the icebox and into my hand? Hustle.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">PERCY: Come on, man. You have to do that right here? It's disgusting. We're in a kitchen. Yeah, real charmer you got there. Really. </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Show some respect, all right?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">That's my mom right there.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">GABE: This is my house. You show some respect.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>3.2 The Method of Characterization Analysis</span></h2></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Dramatic Method</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">In the dramatic method, characters are allowed to reveal themselves to the reader through their own words and actions. This is an alternative method to the discursive method because it shows rather than tells. This method is called ‘Dramatic’ because it is like the way the characters are revealed to people in dramas.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">(7:51-8:11)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">PERCY: Hey, Mom.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">SALLY: How was school today?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">PERCY: The usual. </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">I think this dyslexia thing is getting worse.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">SALLY: Why do you think that?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">PERCY: </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">I don't know. Maybe it's the ADHD. You know, I thought this school was supposed to make things better.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">As shown above, ADHD is a psychological condition experienced by Percy and is often discussed in the movie. The author used Dramatic Method to show Percy's condition to the audience.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Characters on the other Characters Method</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Characters on the other characters method is a method of having one character in a story talk about another. This is the method which one character is presented or described through other characters. It means that one character or more describe or talk about another character in the story.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">(22:47-23:54)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">GROVER: </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Yep, you're a demigod! </span><span class="font2">Two points for Percy Jackson! Look, don't worry. But you're not alone. There's hundreds in the world. Some lead normal lives, and some, I'm not allowed to divulge their names, are very famous. I'm</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 30 No.1</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">talking about, like, White House famous. See, man, this place right here, this is the place where you'll learn to harness your powers. You'll train to become leaders, warriors and heroes.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">PERCY: I think you have the wrong guy, all right? I'm not a hero. I'm a loser. I have dyslexia, ADHD.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">GROVER: And those are your greatest gifts. </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">When you try to read, the words float off the page, right? That's because your brain is hardwired for Ancient Greek, not English.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">PERCY: Like at the museum, I could read.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">GROVER: Yeah. </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">And your ADHD? You're impulsive, Percy</span><span class="font2">. You can't be still! Those are your natural battle reflexes, man. They kept you alive in your fight. Look, no pitiful loser can defeat a Minotaur. </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Your blood is special. It's the blood of a god.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">PERCY: This is a lot to process.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">As shown above, we could observe that the author used the characters on other character method to describe that Percy is not a regular person but he is special because he is a demigod. It was explained through Grover’s point of view. It also showed that Percy is dealing with ADHD which caused him to behave as an impulsive person and why he could not really focus in school. The reason is because beside it is the illness he has, it is also a gift at the same time in which making him to be able to understand ancient Greek.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Mixing Method</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The mixing method is a method which use more than one method in presenting a character. The author presented Percy’s character in several methods that made him as a character who takes an important part as the main focus from the whole story which therefore makes it occupy the central position in the story. It</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">could be seen from the above discussion that the author used the combination of three methods which are dramatic method and characters on the other characters method. Therefore, it could be concluded that the method of characterization being used to shape the main character in the movie Percy Jackson and the Olympians: The Lightning Thief is mixing method.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">This study observed the characterization and methods of characterization of the main character in Percy Jackson and the Olympians: The Lightning Thief. The main character is Percy Jackson. There are two topic discussions in this study: firstly, analysing the physiological, sociological and the psychological aspects of the main character, and secondly, analysing the methods of characterization that was used by the author to describe the main character in the movie. There are 2 theories that adopted as the theoretical framework for this study. The first theory used to analyze the character dimensions is a theory proposed by Egri (1960) and the second theory used to classify the method of characterization is a theory proposed by Kenney (1966).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Firstly, there are 29 total data found from the movie in which for the three dimensional character there are 23 data and for the method of characterization there are 6 data. The analysis based on the three dimensional character found out that for the physiological dimension, Percy has a good looking appearance. For the sociological dimension, he has a connection with some of the other character such as with Grover Underwood, Sally Jackson, Gabriel “Gabe” Ugliano, Mr.Brunner, Luke Castellan, Annabeth Chase, and Poseidon. Meanwhile, for the psychological dimension, Percy is a caring, honest, smart, and stubborn person. He is also has trouble with his eyesight which found out that he has an ADHD or Attention-Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder. Secondly, for the 6 data of the method of characterization, it is found that the author of the movie used 3 out of 5 method to portray the</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 30 No.1</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">characterization of Percy Jackson. Those methods are dramatic method, characters on the other character method, and mixing method.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;References</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Alit Sawitri, Komang. 2016. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Method of Characterization and Three Dimensional Aspects of Main Character in Brontë’s Jane Eyre</span><span class="font2">. Bali: Journal of Arts and Humanities, Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Colombus, Chris and Thor Freudenthal. 2010. Percy Jackson &amp;&nbsp;the Olympians: The Lightning Thief [Film]. Walt Disney Pictures and Pixar Animation Studio. Available &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;from:</span></p>
<p><a href="https://www.disneyplus.com/"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://www.disneyplus.com</span><span class="font2"> </span></a><span class="font2">[Accessed on 14<sup>th</sup> April 2021]</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Egri, Lajos. 1960. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Art of Dramatic Writing</span><span class="font2">. New York: Simon and Schuster, Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Fauziyah, Nailul. 2008. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Psychological analysis of the main character’s personality in Go Ask Alice.</span><span class="font2"> Undergraduate thesis, Universitas Islam Negeri Maulana Malik Ibrahim.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Huda, Khoirul. 2017. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">An Analysis on The Main Character of a Good Teacher in “The Clark Story” Movie</span><span class="font2">. Universitas Islam Darul ‘Ulum Lamongan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Ibrahim, A. M. I. (2020). Hesistancy as an innate flaw in Hamlet’s character: Reading through a psychoanalytic lens. International Journal of English and Literature, 11(2), 21-28. Available from: </span><a href="https://doi.org/10.587/IJEL2020.1330"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://doi.org/10.587/IJEL2020.1330</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">Ifianti, T., &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&amp;&nbsp;Rahman, A. (2020).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">CHARACTERIZATION ANALYSIS OF THE MAIN CHARACTERS OF “FIRST THEY KILLED MY FATHER” MOVIE BY ANGELINA JOLIE. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Journey: Journal of English Language and Pedagogy</span><span class="font2">, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">3</span><span class="font2">(1), 19-25. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Available &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;from:</span></p>
<p><a href="https://doi.org/10.33503/journey.v3i1.708"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://doi.org/10.33503/journey.v3i1.708</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">Kenney, William. 1966. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">How to Analyze Fiction (A Critical Guide to Appreciation of Short Stories, Novellas and Novels).</span><span class="font2"> New York: Monarch Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Merriam-Webster. (n.d.). Good-looking. In Merriam-Webster.com dictionary.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Available &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;from:</span><a href="https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/good-looking"><span class="font2"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://www.merriam-</span></a></p>
<p><a href="https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/good-looking"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">webster.com/dictionary/good-looking</span></a><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;"> </span><span class="font2">[Acessed on 24<sup>th</sup> February 2022]</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Patmarinanta and Ernawati. 2016. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">A Study on Characterization of the Main Character in “The Fault in Our Stars”.</span><span class="font2"> Banda Aceh: Universitas Syiah Kuala.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Sukada, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;I &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Made.1987.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">BeberapaAspekTentangSastra</span><span class="font2">. &nbsp;Denpasar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Kayu Mas.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Thamrin, Nani. 2013. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Character Analysis of Glen Hansard in Once Film</span><span class="font2">. Kuningan: University of Kuningan, Indonesia.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Uspianov, Putu Janet. 2015. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“The Analysis of The Main Character in Jodi Picoult’s Novel My Sister’s Keeper”</span><span class="font2">. Undergraduate Thesis, Denpasar: Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Welleck, Rene and Warren. 1956. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Theory of Literature</span><span class="font2">. New York: Penguins books.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Wellek, Rene and Austin Warren. 1948. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Theory of Literature</span><span class="font2">. London: Cox and Wyman Ltd.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">27</span></p>