---
layout: full_article
title: "The Women’s Language Features in Crazy Rich Asians Movie"
author: "Evellyn Wardhana, I Made Suastra, Ni Luh Nyoman Seri Malini"
categories: linguistika
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/full-99529 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/id-99529"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/full-99529"  
comments: true
---

<p><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/linguistika/"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/linguistika/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">DOI: </span><a href="https://doi.org/10.24843/ling.2023.v30.i01.p06"><span class="font1">https://doi.org/10.24843/ling.2023.v30.i01.p06</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">LINGUISTIKA, MARET 2023</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">p-ISSN: 0854-9613 e-ISSN: 2656-6419</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 30 No.1</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>The Women’s Language Features in Crazy Rich Asians Movie</span></h1>
<p><span class="font3">Evellyn Graciella Wardhana<sup>1</sup>, I Made Suastra<sup>2</sup>, Ni Luh Nyoman Seri Malini<sup>3 </sup>English Department, Faculty of Humanities, Udayana University, Indonesia e-mail:</span><a href="mailto:1evellyngraciella@gmail.com"><span class="font3"> </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;"><sup>1</sup></span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">evellyngraciella@gmail.com</span><span class="font3">,</span></a><a href="mailto:2made_suastra@unud.ac.id"><span class="font3"> </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;"><sup>2</sup></span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">made_suastra@unud.ac.id</span><span class="font3">,</span></a><a href="mailto:3serimalini@unud.ac.id"><span class="font3"> </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;"><sup>3</sup></span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">serimalini@unud.ac.id</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstract--T</span><span class="font3">his study aims to identify the women’s language features in Crazy Rich Asians movie. The women’s language features are identified using the theory of language and woman’s place proposed by Lakoff (2004). This is a qualitative study that used documentation and observation checklist method in collecting the data. In analyzing the data, this study applied the content analysis method. The result of the analysis was presented descriptively using the informal method. The analysis comes to the conclusion that the Crazy Rich Asian movie contains all women’s language features. There are ten women’s language features, namely lexical hedges, tag questions, rising intonation, empty adjectives, precise color terms, intensifiers, hypercorrect grammar, superpolite forms, avoidance of swearwords, and emphatic stress.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Keywords</span><span class="font3">: </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Sociolinguistics, Women’s Language, Women’s Language Features, Crazy Rich Asians.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstrak--</span><span class="font3">Penelitian ini bertujuan untuk mengidentifikasi fitur Bahasa wanita pada film Crazy Rich Asians. Fitur Bahasa wanita diidentifikasi menggunakan teori language and woman’s place oleh Lakoff (2004). Penelitian ini merupakan penelitian kualitatif yang menggunakan metode dokumentasi dan observasi dalam mengumpulkan data. Di dalam menganalisa data, penelitian ini menggunakan metode Analisa konten. Hasil dari Analisa dipresentasikan secara deskriptif menggunakan metode informal. Penelitian mencapai kesimpulan bahwa terdapat semua fitur bahasa wanita pada film Crazy Rich Asian. Ada sepuluh fitur Bahasa wanita, yaitu </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">lexical hedges, tag questions, rising intonation, empty adjectives, precise color terms, intensifiers, hypercorrect grammar, superpolite forms, avoidance of swearwords, and emphatic stress.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Kata Kunci</span><span class="font3">: </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Sosiolinguistik, Bahasa Wanita, Fitur Bahasa Wanita, Crazy Rich Asians.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 30 No.1</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Introduction</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Gender is one of the major topics in Sociolinguistics that discuss the connection between features, structures, vocabularies, and ways of using language and the social role of men and women (Eckert, 2003: 9). Moreover, according to Wardhaugh (2006: 316), gender is the main component of identity. Different from sex which is biologically determined, gender refers to sexual identity in the relation to society or culture (Wardhaugh, 2006: 315). Different gender also means different word choices in using the language. Both men and women might also have a different paralinguistic system, move, and gesture. In fact, women tend to be more polite and use indirect expressions when they speak. On the other hand, we find that men are more direct in delivering intentions. In our society, we can see some kind of ideal that is created for both women and men. Women are seen as weak and less compared to men who are expected to be stronger and have more power. Thus, women have these special characteristics that distinguish them from men. Furthermore, this uniqueness also applied to how they use language. As the result, because of their subordinate position, women frequently show uncertainty and lack of confidence in their expression. They tend to soften their expression through the usage of polite forms and avoiding rude or swearwords. Women also tend to choose mere topics such as relationships, friendships, family, and so on as their conversation topics. This is the reason why women are way more expressive than men in conversation. This certain way of using language is known as women’s language. This language, of course, contains some features in it.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Women’s language features can be found in everyday life including in our daily conversations, novel, song, speech, TV shows, serials, and movies. Based on that phenomenon, this study aims to identify the women’s language features in Crazy Rich Asians movie using the theory of language and woman’s place proposed by Lakoff (2004).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">There are some studies to be reviewed in relation to the topic of this study. The study conducted by Aini (2016) aims to identify the women’s speech features and how women’s language is used by the main character in the movie. This qualitative study applied two theories, such as the theory of sociolinguistics by Lakoff (1975) and the theory of social factors by Holmes (1992). This study comes to the conclusion that the movie contains six women’s features. The undergraduate study by Retiningrum (2020) aims to investigate the type and function of women’s language. This qualitative study used the theory of sociolinguistics by Lakoff (1975). The finding shows that there are only nine women’s language features in the movie. The article by Priska (2020) focused on finding out the types of women’s language features in the movie. This mixed method study applied the theory of sociolinguistics by Lakoff (1975). The finding shows that there are only nine types out of ten used in the movie. The article by Anjani (2019) aims to find out the types of women’s language features used by the female character in Wonder Woman movie. This quantitative study applied the theory of sociolinguistics by Holmes (2013). The findings show that Wonder Woman movie contains all types of women’s language features. The article by Sanjaya (2018) aims to identify the women’s language features and context of a situation using the theory of sociolinguistics by Lakoff (1975) and the theory of context of the situation by Halliday and Hasan (1989). This qualitative study comes to the conclusion that there are only seven types of women’s language features found in the data. The study conducted by Andriani &amp;&nbsp;Soethama (2018) aims to find and describe the women’s language features in Summer McKeen’s vlogs using the theory of women’s language by Lakoff (1975). This qualitative study comes to the conclusion that there are all types of women’s language features in the vlogs. The last article to be reviewed is conducted by Mahardiani (2018) aims to identify and analyze the women’s language styles and their characteristics in Pitch Perfect Movie using the theory of women’s language style by Tannen</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 30 No.1</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">(1990. This qualitative study comes to the conclusion that there are all types of women’s language styles such as support, understanding, feelings, proposal, and compromise. There are also some supporting characteristics, namely to show connote triviality, to get response of something, to show uncertainty, to give a suggestion, and to express feelings. The contribution of these earlier studies is expected to give a deeper understanding of this current study. The dividing line is, that this study used a more updated data source and more updated theory about women’s language features.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The study of language features has carried out by many experts. Lakoff (2004) proposes the theory of language features which focuses on genders. According to Lakoff (2004), the way women and men deliver the contents of the conversation is different because it reflects their social status in society. Moreover, she also explains the four main reasons why women applied the women’s language features in their utterances, such as social class and its related status explanation, women’s role in the society, women’s status as a subordinate group, and the function of speech in expressing gender identity, and especially masculinity. Women believe that the way they speak is a reflection of their social class or social status in the community. Thus, women’s language features are applied by women in order to claim higher status. Women also use the standard forms because society expects them to be a good model and have good behavior. Additionally, women also seen as inferior compared to men. Thus, women use standard form of politeness to respect the superior.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">There are four points in this section, namely data source, method and technique of collecting data, method and technique of analyzing data, and method and technique of presenting data. Qualitative method was used in this study. According to Creswell (2014: 261), qualitative method relies on text and visual data, have distinct analysis procedures, and use a variety of design.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The type of data in this study is qualitative data. The primary data is the video recording or movie of Crazy Rich Asians. While the secondary data is from dictionaries, articles, and books related to the topic. Crazy Rich Asians is a satirical 2018 romantic comedy movie directed by Jon M. Chu based on the 2013 bestselling novel with the same title written by Kevin Kwan. The movie was starred by Constance Wu (Rachel Chu), Henry Golding (Nicholas Young or Nick), and Michelle Yeoh (Eleanor Sung-Young). The story begins with Rachel Chu, a liberal feminist and an economics professor at NYU, who live as a native New Yorker with her lifetime boyfriend, Nick Young. However, she does not know that Nick belongs to one of the richest families in Singapore. This movie tells about the lives of crazy rich Asian people in Singapore. They belong to the upper class because they have abundant wealth and power, but they also like to interfere and find out about other people’s lives. The movie can be accessed through the official website, namely Netflix. Netflix, Inc. is an American subscription streaming service that provides film and television series since 1997. The reason why Crazy Rich Asians movie is used as the data source is that this movie contains a lot of secrets and stories expressed through the female character’s language, and of course, this female’s language also contains features in it. Moreover, this movie tells the audience a lot about women’s real life, both upperclass and middle-class women.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">There are two methods applied in the collecting data process, namely documentation and observation method. The documentation and observation method used several steps of the technique of collecting data. First, searched and downloaded the Crazy Rich Asians movie from Netflix. After the movie was downloaded, the next step was watching the movie and note-taking the utterance which contains women’s language features. The last step was observing the utterance gathered using a checklist instrument.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Content analysis method was used in the process of analyzing the data. The data collected were identified and explained based on the theory</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 30 No.1</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">of language and woman’s place by Lakoff (2004). The content analysis method employed several steps of the technique of analyzing the data. The process began with classifying the data which indicates women’s language features. Then, reduced and organized the data that has been classified before. The final steps were analyzing and explaining the selected data based on the related theory.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The result of the analysis in the previous process will be presented descriptively using the informal method based on the theory of language and woman’s place proposed by Lakoff (2004).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Result and Discussion</span><br><br><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark8"></a>3.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Result</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The findings showed that Crazy Rich Asians movie contains all types of women’s language features proposed by Lakoff (2004), such as lexical hedges, tag questions, rising intonation, empty adjectives, precise color terms, intensifiers, hypercorrect grammar, superpolite form, avoidance of swearwords, and emphatic stress. There are also four reasons why women used women’s language features, such as social class and its related status explanation, women’s role in the society, women’s status as a subordinate group, and the function of speech in expressing gender identity, and especially masculinity.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Table 1.</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">No.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Types of Women’s Language Features</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Reasons</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">1.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Lexical Hedges</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">Women’s status as a subordinate group, and women’s role in society.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">2.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Tag Questions</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">Social class and its related status explanation, and women’s status as a subordinate group.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">3.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Rising Intonation</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">Social class and its related status explanation.</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">4.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Empty Adjectives</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">The &nbsp;&nbsp;function &nbsp;&nbsp;of</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">speech in expressing gender identity.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">5.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Precise Color Terms</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">The function of speech in expressing gender identity.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">6.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Intensifiers</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">The function of speech in expressing gender identity, social class and its related status explanation, and women’s status as a subordinate group.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">7.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Hypercorrect Grammar</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">The function of speech in expressing gender identity, and women’s status as a subordinate group.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">8.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Superpolite Forms</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">Women’s &nbsp;&nbsp;role &nbsp;&nbsp;in</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">society.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">9.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Avoidance of using Strong Swearwords</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Social class and its status explanation, women’s role in society.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">10.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font3">Emphatic Stress</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3">The function of speech in expressing gender identity.</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark9"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark10"></a>3.2 . Discussion</span><br><br><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>3.2.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Lexical Hedges</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Lexical hedges or fillers are items that aim to reduce the force of an utterance or to indicate doubt (Lakoff, 2004: 79).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Example: you know, sort of, well, you see (Holmes, 2013: 302).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The example of lexical hedges usage in Crazy Rich Asians movie is presented below.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Nick: “I really like that place, thank you very much. And yes, my family has money, but I’ve always thought of it as theirs. Not mine.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Rachel: “I get that. But I’m going all the way over there to meet them… </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Kind of </span><span class="font3">just wanna know what I’m getting into. And, </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">you know</span><span class="font3">, they’re your family.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 30 No.1</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The conversation occurred between Rachel and Nick when they finally ended up on a first-class flight. At first, Rachel thought that they would be directly going to the economy class flight just like what they have planned. But then a flight attendant directly led them to the first-class area. It makes her wonder and have an assumption that her boyfriend, Nick is actually hiding something from her. Rachel senses there is more to this. Nick tells her that his family has business with the airline, real estate, investment, and others. Rachel applied two lexical hedges in her utterance, such as </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">kind of </span><span class="font3">and </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">you know</span><span class="font3">. These two lexical hedges show that Rachel was unsure. Lexical hedges help her to pause and to support what she wanted to say. Her utterance which said </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">kind of just wanna know what I’m getting into, </span><span class="font3">represents her intention to know about Nick’s family in Singapore, to know the environment, and everything she has not known about. Moreover, her utterance which said, </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">and, you know, they’re your family </span><span class="font3">means that she was trying to remind Nick that she needs to know about his family and everything about him. The reason why Rachel used lexical hedge in her utterance is that she lack of certainty and expressed her status as a subordinate in society and showing her role in society.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>3.2.2 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Tag Questions</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Tag questions fall between an absolute statement and yes or no questions. It is more certain yet less aggressive than the latter (Lakoff, 2004: 48).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Example: She’s very nice, </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">isn’t she</span><span class="font3">? (Holmes, 2013: 302).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The example of tag questions in Crazy Rich Asians movie is presented below.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Rachel: “I know Nick told you the truth about my mom. But you didn’t like me the second I got here. Why is that?”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Eleanor: “There’s a Hokkien phrase. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Ka gi lan</span><span class="font3">. It means ‘our own kind of people.’ And you’re not our own kind.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Rachel: “Cause I’m not rich? ‘Cause I didn’t go to British boarding school or I wasn’t born into a wealthy family?”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Eleanor: “You’re a foreigner. </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">American</span><span class="font3">. And all Americans think about is their own happiness.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Rachel: “</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Don’t you </span><span class="font3">want Nick to be happy?”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The conversation occurred between Eleanor and Rachel while they were playing </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">mah-jongg</span><span class="font3">. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Mah-jongg</span><span class="font3"> is a tile-based game developed in China in the 19<sup>th</sup> century and commonly played by four players. The entire movie showed us that Eleanor dislikes Rachel because she is a liberal, an American, and not </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">ka gi lan</span><span class="font3"> which means Asian kind of people. Moreover, Eleanor could not accept the fact that her son, Nick is actually having a serious and lifetime relationship with a foreign girl. This scene tells us that they are having an honest conversation about Nick and Rachel’s relationship, the reason why Eleanor dislikes Rachel, and ended up with Rachel asking whether Eleanor wants her son to be happy in the future or not. Rachel’s utterance which contains a tag question was, </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">don’t you want Nick to be happy? </span><span class="font3">She used the tag </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">don’t you </span><span class="font3">since she was pretty certain that Eleanor, as Nick’s mother, would always wish the best for him and want him to be happy in the future. Additionally, Rachel was also confident enough that her statement would be true and accepted by Eleanor. The reason why Rachel applied tag question in her utterance was that she was aware of her status in social class and represent women’s status as subordinate group.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>3.2.3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Rising Intonation</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Rising intonation on declarative indicates that there is an unwillingness to be assertive in carrying an opinion (Lakoff 2004: 50). This feature shows a confirmation from the speaker since she is unsure if her idea or opinion is true.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Example: It’s really </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">góod. </span><span class="font3">(Holmes, 2013: 302)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The rising intonation is used to show tentativeness. The example of rising intonation in Crazy Rich Asians movie is presented below. [Rachel flees, upsets, when she collides with someone. It’s Astrid, who’s just arrived. She clutches a bag while porters behind her carry her luggage]</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Rachel: “Sorry.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 30 No.1</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Astrid: </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">“Rachel?”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">[They head to the resort villa suite --]</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Astrid: “I’m so sorry.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Rachel: “It’s okay.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The short conversation occurred between Rachel and Astrid (Nick’s cousin) whom she accidentally collided. The scene begins with Rachel feeling uncomfortable because Amanda, a new friend she met during Nick’s friends’ bachelorette party, disrespected her by roasting her relationship with Nick. Moreover, Amanda has a group of friends who also agreed that Rachel is nothing to Nick. Amanda and her friends made up a scene to mock and badmouth Rachel when she seems finally irritated and uncomfortable and finally decided to leave the spa resort. When Rachel left, she accidentally collided with Astrid who just arrived there. Astrid seemed a bit surprised and called Rachel to make sure that it is truly her. </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Rachel? </span><span class="font3">expressed rising intonation and seek confirmation whether it is true or not. The reason why Astrid applied rising intonation in her utterance was to show her social class and status in society.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>3.2.4 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Empty Adjectives</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Empty adjectives indicate the speaker’s admiration of something (Lakoff, 2004: &nbsp;25).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Through this feature, the speaker also wants to show an emotional connection to the listener. Example: Women mostly use neutral adjectives, such as </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">adorable, charming, sweet, lovely, divine, etc. </span><span class="font3">(Holmes, 2013: 302)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The example of empty adjectives in Crazy Rich Asians movie is presented below.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Eleanor: “Self-made woman. She must be so proud of you.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">[Eleanor continues fiddling and fussing with the table, inspecting the food, coldly turning her back on the couple]</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Rachel: “Well, she knows that I’m passionate about what I do, and she’s always wanted that for me.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Eleanor: “Pursuing one’s passions. How American. Well, your mother is very open-minded,</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">not like here, where parents are obsessed with shaping the life of their children.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">[It sounds like a compliment, but Rachel isn’t entirely sure. Eleanor turns away again to talk to a passing COOK before returning to Rachel] [Eleanor shoots Nick a look. He shifts, uncomfortable, and is relieved to hear a MUSICAL GONG from upstairs]</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Nick: “Hmm. Oh. That’s dinner.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Eleanor: “Hmm. Go ahead. I’ll be out in a minute.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Rachel, it was </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">lovely </span><span class="font3">meeting.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Rachel: “Thank you. You, too.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">[Rachel smiles as she and Nick head off]</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The conversation occurred between Eleanor, Rachel, and Nick in the kitchen. The scene begins with Nick introducing Rachel to Eleanor (his mother). Both Eleanor and Rachel tried to admire each other. But it seemed Eleanor was surprised about her appearance. She found out that Rachel is different from her kind of people. Eleanor’s utterance contains an empty adjective was </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">hmm. Go ahead. I’ll be out in a minute. Rachel, it was lovely meeting. </span><span class="font3">Even if Eleanor seemed uninterested in Rachel, she tried to respect their first meeting by saying </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">it was lovely meeting</span><span class="font3">. Eleanor applied empty adjective to emphasize her impression about her first meeting with Rachel. The reason why Eleanor applied empty adjectives in her utterance was to show her gender identity and give a form of appreciation.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>3.2.5 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Precise Color Terms</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">According to Lakoff (2004: 43), women have the ability to interpret colors differently from men. Vocabularies regarding colors are well identified by women. On the other hand, men generally do not care about the accuracy of color because it does not involve their emotions at all, in contrast to women who always question the accuracy of color.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Example: magenta, maroon, beige, ecru, lavender, aquamarine, turquoise, mustard, etc. (Holmes, 2013: 303)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The usage of precise color terms in Crazy Rich Asians movie is presented below.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Rachel: “Hey, Mom, this one’s kind of cute.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 30 No.1</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">[Rachel looks at her reflection in a mirror as she holds a blue and white dress to her body. Her mother, Kerry (50s, real estate agent, Chico chic), shakes her head. Kerry has a slight Chinese immigrant accent]</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Rachel: “What do you think?”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Kerry: “No! No! No! No! You can’t wear that to meet Nick’s Ah Ma. </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Blue and white is for Chinese funerals. Now this, this symbolizes good fortune and fertility.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">[Kerry holds up a conservative </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Red </span><span class="font3">dress] Rachel: “Great! I was really going for that ‘lucky baby-maker’ vibe.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Kerry: “Hey! You are the one who asked for my help picking out a dress to meet Nick’s family.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The conversation occurs between Kerry (Rachel’s mother) and Rachel and took place in a clothing boutique. Rachel asked Kerry to help her pick out a dress to meet Nick’s family. At first, Rachel picked out a blue and white. But Kerry refused that by saying that blue and white colors are for Chinese funerals. After that, Kerry picked out red dress which symbolizes good fortune and fertility. But according to Rachel, it makes her look like a lucky baby-maker vibe. There are three color terms here, which are blue, white, and red. According to Chinese belief and culture, blue and white are used for death or funerals. On the other hand, red symbolizes joy, luck, and happiness. Moreover, it also represents celebration, vitality, and fertility. This scene tells us that women really pay attention to colors and their meanings. While men, have little to almost no attention to color and its relation to certain meaning or value. From the scene, Kerry paid attention enough to the color of the dress chosen by Rachel. The reason why Kerry and Rachel applied precise color terms was to show their gender identity and as women they pay attention enough to color terms and their meaning.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark20"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark21"></a>3.2.6 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Intensifiers</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">According to Lakoff (2004: 48), intensifiers aim to intensify sentences, whether to increase or decrease them.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Example: </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">just </span><span class="font3">and </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">so</span><span class="font3">, e.g. I like him </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">so </span><span class="font3">much. (Holmes, 2013: 303)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The example of intensifiers in Crazy Rich Asians movie is presented below.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Rachel: “You okay?”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Astrid: “Yeah…” [beat; close to tears] Astrid: “Actually… no…” Rachel: “You could talk to me.” [Tough to say]</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Astrid: “Michael is… having an affair.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Rachel: “</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">I’m really sorry</span><span class="font3">, Astrid.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The conversation occurred between Astrid and Rachel at night at the beach where the drunken bachelorettes dance and have parties throughout the night. Astrid and Rachel decided to find a more peaceful space to have a vulnerable moment and talk about their life. But before having a conversation, Rachel dumps the previous dead fish she accidentally found in her resort room from Amanda and her friends as a form of terror and mocks into the hole and buried it. Astrid started the conversation about her life and her husband but it seemed that she was unhappy recently with what she had and Rachel recognized that something is wrong with her. Rachel asked whether she is okay or not and Astrid finally opened up that her husband, Michael has been cheating on her. Rachel directly expressed that she sympathized with her by saying </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">I’m really sorry, Astrid. </span><span class="font3">The intensifier </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">really </span><span class="font3">aimed to intensify and increase Rachel’s emotional message that she also felt sorry for her. This also expressed that Rachel cares about Astrid’s problem and is on her side. The reason why Rachel applied intensifiers in her utterance was to show the function of speech in expressing gender identity, social class and its related status explanation, and women’s status as a subordinate group.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark22"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>3.2.7 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Hypercorrect Grammar</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Hypercorrect grammar is related to politeness in utterance. According to Lakoff (2004: 80), the use of g ‘in the word singin’ is more dropped by men than women do. Women tend to use standard and more grammatical than men</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 30 No.1</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">(Holmes, 2013: 303). The usage of hypercorrect grammar in Crazy Rich Asians movie is presented below.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Nick: “I screwed up.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Rachel: “Why?”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Nick: “I really messed up, okay?”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Rachel: “Why? What – </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">were you trying to test me? Why would you do that?”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The conversation occurred between Rachel and Nick the moment they got back to their hotel. Rachel was disappointed and mad because of what she had experienced during the bachelorette party. Rachel expected that she came along from New York to Singapore to meet Nick’s family and have a good time with them. But it ended up with her having a horrible experience with those girls. Nick did not know what Rachel had and felt at that time. He asked her to tell him everything and when at the same time he also opened up that he was also messed up. Rachel was surprised and guessed whether Nick tested her or not. From the conversation above, it can be seen that Rachel used more grammatical structure than Nick. It is proven from her utterance which said </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">why? What – were you trying to test me? Why would you do that? </span><span class="font3">Rachel used a complete form by saying </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">were you trying to test me? </span><span class="font3">and </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">why would you do that? </span><span class="font3">The reasons why Rachel applied hypercorrect grammar in her utterance was to show the function of speech in expressing gender identity, and women’s status as a subordinate group.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark24"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark25"></a>3.2.8 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Superpolite Form</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">According to Lakoff (2004: 77), women’s speech differs from men’s because women are more polite since women are the preservers of morality and civility. For example, women should behave and communicate politely and very carefully, avoid assertive words, make requests indirectly, euphemisms, and grammar hypercorrect (Holmes, 2013: 303). The usage of superpolite form in Crazy Rich Asians movie is presented below.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Araminta: “Listen, Rachel, I know we’ve only just met, but it’s my bachelorette party this</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">weekend and I would love for you to come.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">[Rachel is surprised, happy to be embraced by Nick’s pals.]</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Rachel: “That would be amazing. </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Thank you so much!</span><span class="font3">”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Araminta: “Good! Good!”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This scene occurred when Rachel and Nick were already in Singapore and having a really good dinner at the Singapore food court with Nick’s friend, Colin, and his soon-to-be bride, Araminta. Araminta invited Rachel to come to her bachelorette party on weekend. Rachel was surprised and happy at the same time because she was embraced by Nick’s friend. As a form of appreciation, respect, and acceptance, Rachel said </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">That would be amazing. Thank you so much! </span><span class="font3">which contains superpolite expression which is </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">thank you so much</span><span class="font3">. The reason why Rachel applied superpolite form was to show women’s role in society.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark26"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark27"></a>3.2.9 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Avoidance of Swearwords</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Women tend to avoid swear words. They usually use softer forms. According to Lakoff (2004: 44), a woman is encouraged to become a little girl who does not scream loudly and represents softer emotion than a man.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Example: fudge, oh dear, oh my gosh, oh my god, my goodness. (Holmes, 2013: 303)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The avoidance of swearwords in Crazy Rich Asians movie is presented below.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">[Neena and Peik Lin show Rachel into the cavernous living room, everything is covered with gold or mirrors. Rachel takes it in, amazed.] Neenah: “Rachel, welcome, welcome.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Rachel: “Wow! Oh, my gosh! Your house is amazing, Mrs. Goh.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Neenah: “</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Li gaou kong wei ah</span><span class="font3">. (You’re such a sweet talker). Call me Auntie. Auntie Neenah.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Rachel: “Sorry. Auntie Neenah.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The scene occurred between Rachel, Peik Lin (Rachel’s best friend), and Neenah (Peik Lin’s mother) when Rachel visited their house. Rachel showed admiration when she saw their house by</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 30 No.1</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">saying </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Wow! Oh, my gosh! Your house is amazing, Mrs. Goh. </span><span class="font3">She avoided the use of swearwords, instead, she replaced them by saying </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">wow </span><span class="font3">and </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">oh my gosh </span><span class="font3">to show a more polite expression of her admiration, amazement, and surprise. Compared to men, women tend to use </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">oh my god, oh my gosh, oh dear, oh love, oh god </span><span class="font3">which indicates their direct reaction when seeing something magnificent or terrifying. The reason why Rachel applied the avoidance of strong swearwords was to show social class and its status explanation, women’s role in society.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark28"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark29"></a>3.2.10 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Emphatic Stress</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">According to Lakoff (2004: 81), emphatic stress is a form of referral to tell someone how to react because what was said by the speaker is less convincing then it is better to use more power to ensure the hearer can understand what is being said before.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Example: &nbsp;fabulous, very, very, very, great,</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">magnificent, wonderful, enough, brilliant, e.g. it was a </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">brilliant </span><span class="font3">performance. (Holmes, 2013: 303)</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The usage of emphatic stress in Crazy Rich Asians movie is presented below.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Nick: “Mum, this is Rachel Chu.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Rachel: “Oh, my gosh! </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">I, I’m so happy to meet you, Mrs. Young.</span><span class="font3">”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">[Gives her a big hug.]</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Rachel: “Or, uh, Auntie. Right?”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">[Giggles]</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Rachel: “I’m learning the lingo.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">[Eleanor smiles, subtly scans Rachel, evaluating her.]</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Eleanor: “I’m very glad to finally meet you, too. And I’m sorry Nick’s father couldn’t be here. He was called to business in Shanghai.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The conversation occurred between Rachel, Nick, and Eleanor. It was Rachel and Eleanor’s first meeting during a party in Eleanor’s house. Aside from avoiding swearwords, Rachel emphasized that she was excited to meet Nick’s mother by saying </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">I, I’m so happy to meet you, Mrs. Young. </span><span class="font3">Additionally, as a form of respect</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">and response, Eleanor replied with </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">I’m very glad to finally meet you too. </span><span class="font3">Both Rachel and Eleanor shared the same emphatic stress to show that they are pleased to meet each other. The reason why Rachel applied emphatic stress in her utterance was to show the function of speech in expressing gender identity.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark30"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark31"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Based on the analysis above, it can be concluded that Crazy Rich Asians movie contains all types of women’s language features. There are 10 types of women’s language features according to Lakoff (2004), such as lexical hedges, tag questions, rising intonation, empty adjectives, precise color terms, intensifiers, hypercorrect grammar, superpolite form, avoidance of swearwords, and emphatic stress. Lexical hedges, tag questions, and intensifiers aim to show hesitancy, invite someone to tell something, encourage other women to join the conversation, confirm something, show emotional state, and express emotion, praise, and admiration to someone. On the other hand, the usage of rising intonation, emphatic stress, empty adjectives, avoidance of swearwords, hypercorrect grammar, and superpolite form is to express appreciation to someone, seek confirmation, polite requests, leave an open decision, and reduce the force of utterance. It can be also concluded that women and men applied different patterns of language use. Because of their subordinate position in society compared to men, women tend to soften their expressions and choose mere topics in their conversations. In most cases, women lack of certainty and confidence. While men are expected to look stronger and have more power than women. This study gives the example of women’s language features and contributes to the improvement in understanding of women’s language features in Crazy Rich Asians movie. It is expected that this study becomes one of many references for language study students to learn more about women’s language features.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 30 No.1</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark32"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark33"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;References</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Aini, L. M. 2016. Women Language Used by the Main Characters of Mockingjay Movie. Undergraduate thesis. Malang. Maulana Malik Ibrahim State Islamic University of Malang.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Andriani, K. &amp;&nbsp;Soethama, P. L. Women’s Language Features in Summer McKeen’s Vlogs. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Humanis</span><span class="font3">. Vol. 22, No. 3, Augustus, pp. 735-741.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Anjani, L. D. &amp;&nbsp;Setiawan, S. 2019. Women’s Language Features Used by the Female Characters in Wonder Woman Movie. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Language Horizon</span><span class="font3">. Vol. 7, No. 1, July, pp. 104-110.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Coates, J. 2004. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Women, Men and Language</span><span class="font3">. London: Longman.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Creswell, J. W. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;2014. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Research Design</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Qualitative, Quantitative, and Mixed Methods Approaches, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;4<sup>th</sup> &nbsp;&nbsp;Edition.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Singapore: SAGE Publication Asia-Pacific.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Eckert, P. 2003. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Language and &nbsp;Gender</span><span class="font3">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Holmes, J. 2013. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">An Introduction to Sociolinguistics the 4<sup>th</sup> Edition</span><span class="font3">. New York: Routledge.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Holmes, J. &amp;&nbsp;Meyerhoff, M. 2003. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">The Handbook of Language and Gender</span><span class="font3">. Berlin: Blackwell Publishing Ltd.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Hornby, A. S. 1989. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Oxford Advanced Learner’s Dictionary of Current English</span><span class="font3">. Oxford: Oxford University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Lakoff, R. 1975. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Language and Woman’s Place</span><span class="font3">. New York: Harper &amp;&nbsp;Row.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Lakoff, R. 2004. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Language and Woman’s Place Text and Commentaries</span><span class="font3">. New York: Oxford University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Mahardiani, P. U. 2018. Language Style of Women in the Movies Pitch Perfect. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Humanis</span><span class="font3">. Vol. 22, No. 4, November, pp. 1116-1123</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Netflix. 2018. Crazy Rich Asians.</span></p>
<p><a href="https://www.netflix.com/id-en/title/80239019"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://www.netflix.com/id-en/title/80239019</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3">Priska, N. P. D., Candra, K. D. P., &amp;&nbsp;Utami, N. M. V. 2020. The Types of Women Language Features Found in The Fault In Our Stars</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Movie. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Lingual</span><span class="font3">. Vol. 9, No. 1, January, pp. 1-7.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Retiningrum, C. W. 2020. Women’s Language Features Used by Lara Jean in The Movie To All The Boys I’ve Loved Before. Undergraduate thesis. Surabaya. UIN Sunan Ampel Surabaya.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Sanjaya, Y. 2018. The Women’s Language Features in Moana Movie. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Humanis</span><span class="font3">. Vol. 22, No. 3, August, pp. 792-795.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Tanjung, S. N. &amp;&nbsp;Mayasari. 2022. Politeness in Using Mandailingnese Personal Subject Pronouns in Medan. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Linguistika</span><span class="font3">. Vol. 29, No. 1, March, pp. 73-82.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Wardhaugh, R. 2006. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">An Introduction to Sociolinguistics the 5<sup>th</sup> Edition</span><span class="font3">. Oxford: Blackwell Publishing Ltd.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Wardhaugh, R. &amp;&nbsp;Fuller, J. M. 2010. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">An Introduction to Sociolinguistics the 6<sup>th </sup>Edition</span><span class="font3">. Chichester: Blackwell Publishing Ltd.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">48</span></p>