---
layout: full_article
title: "Impact Assessment of Pandemic Covid-19 on Four Typologies of Tourism Villages in The Special Region of Yogyakarta"
author: "Shinta Permana Putri"
categories: eot
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/eot/full-107057 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/eot/id-107057"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/eot/full-107057"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font2">E-Journal of Tourism Vol.10. No.2. (2023): 207-218</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>Impact Assessment of Pandemic Covid-19 on Four Typologies of Tourism Villages in The Special Region of Yogyakarta</span></h1>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>Shinta Permana Putri<sup>*</sup></span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">Department of Urban and Regional Planning, Faculty of Sains and Technology, Universitas Terbuka</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">*Corresponding Author: </span><a href="mailto:shintap@ecampus.ut.ac.id"><span class="font2">shintap@ecampus.ut.ac.id</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">DOI: </span><a href="https://doi.org/10.24922/eot.v10i2.107057"><span class="font1">https://doi.org/10.24922/eot.v10i2.107057</span></a></p>
<div>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Article Info</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Submitted:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">September 8<sup>th</sup> 2023</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Accepted:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">September 20<sup>th</sup> 2023</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Published:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">September 30<sup>th</sup> 2023</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstract</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The pandemic has caused dramatic changes in the tourism sector globally including tourist villages. This study aims to identify the impact of the Covid-19 pandemic on four typologies of tourist villages in DIY, both positively and negatively. This research is qualitative research. Data was collected through interviews with the head of the tourist village. Content analysis is an analytical technique used in this study. The results of the study show that the COVID-19 pandemic does not always have a detrimental impact but also creates opportunities for tourism village communities to make sustainable progress. The positive impact of Covid-19 on tourist villages can be seen in terms of finance, environment, social cohesion, youth participation, product innovation, management/regulation changes, facilities, networking, and increasing technology use. Even so, Covid-19 still leaves new challenges for tourist villages to face a new era of post-pandemic tourism. These results certainly have implications for the practice of developing tourist villages in DIY in the future.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Keywords</span><span class="font2">: tourism village; covid-19; opportunity; innovation; sustainable.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">INTRODUCTION</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>Background</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">The pandemic has caused dramatic changes in the tourism sector globally (Everingham &amp;&nbsp;Chassagne, 2020; Jeon &amp;&nbsp;Yang, 2021). Covid-19 is known to have caused the tourism industry to experience dormancy, tourism actors lose income, switch to other sectors and look for other alternative jobs (Kristiana et al., 2021). There are many negative impacts that have been caused by Covid-19. This impact is not only felt by large-scale tourism but also in the scope of local tourism such as tourist villages. The existence of travel</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">restrictions and social distancing to reduce the spread of covid-19 has had a serious impact on tourism and the communities. This condition certainly has an impact on the collapse of the local economy (Sann et al., 2023).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The most significant negative impact felt from the Covid-19 pandemic is the reduction in visitors which has an impact on the financial condition of the tourist village (Damanik et al., 2022). This impact is felt especially by people who depend on tourist villages for their economic activities (Parwata et al., 2022). This reduced number of visitors has serious consequences for the sustainability of tourism</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">villages. With their income significantly reduced, this condition makes facilities neglected, marketing and partnership efforts stop, institutional activities are greatly reduced, and the total closure of tourism services (Damanik et al., 2022).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">On the other hand, the Covid-19 pandemic has also had a positive impact (Movono &amp;&nbsp;Scheyvens, 2022). Many innovations in product diversification or alternative tourism activities have emerged during the pandemic (Damanik et al., 2022; Jeon &amp;&nbsp;Yang, 2021; Kristiana et al., 2021; Panzer-Krause, 2022; Parwata et al., 2022; Rogerson et al., 2021). In addition, the existence of this pandemic has prompted a change in people's mindset regarding the importance of cleanliness and environmental sustainability for the sustainability of tourist villages (Candia &amp;&nbsp;Pirlone, 2022; Damanik et al., 2022; Everingham &amp;&nbsp;Chas-sagne, 2020). The community has also felt a change in mindset regarding the importance of reserve funds and also the importance of using technology during a crisis (Alghamdi &amp;&nbsp;Alghamdi, 2022; Damanik et al., 2022; Parwata et al., 2022). The pandemic is also a moment for the natural environment to recover (Hakim, 2020). Another impact is increasing society's adaptability in times of crisis, for example by changing work systems or worker rotation (Damanik et al., 2022). In addition, stronger social cohesion and increased involvement among tourism village communities are also other positive impacts (Everingham &amp;&nbsp;Chassagne, 2020; Movono &amp;&nbsp;Scheyvens, 2022).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The Covid-19 pandemic has ultimately created new opportunities and challenges for tourist villages. This challenge, namely the Covid-19 pandemic, has apparently also influenced changes in tourist behavior in choosing tourist destinations (Everingham &amp;&nbsp;Chassagne, 2020; Jeon &amp;&nbsp;Yang, 2021; NZIER, 2020; Seal &amp;&nbsp;Prem-alatha, 2022). The choice of tourist destination is greatly influenced by the level of safety and cleanliness (Damanik et al., 2022; Jeon &amp;&nbsp;Yang, 2021; Seal &amp;</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Premalatha, 2022). This condition will certainly have implications for the direction of the tourism industry, including tourist villages. Tourism is currently starting to shift towards sustainable tourism compared to mass tourism (Hakim, 2020).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">In realizing this, the role of partners and the younger generation is very important (Kurniasih et al., 2022; McCartney et al., 2022; Panzer-Krause, 2022; Robina-Ramírez et al., 2022). The Covid-19 pandemic is the most appropriate time to make community economic progress more sustainable (Candia &amp;&nbsp;Pirlone, 2022; Evering-ham &amp;&nbsp;Chassagne, 2020). This pandemic is also an important moment for tourism to think about building resilience and recovery in the future (Kristiana et al., 2021; Rogerson et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2020). In the end, the biggest challenge that tourist villages must face is restoring visitor trust (Gowreesunkar et al., 2022). Thus, the COVID-19 pandemic highlights that society still faces various unpredictable risks in the future. However, these risks also create opportunities for communities to make progress (Zhang et al., 2020).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">In Indonesia, tourist villages have a strategic role in improving the local economy. The Yogyakarta city is one of the cities in Indonesia which is known for its diversity of tourist villages. In its development, there are four typologies of tourist villages that have developed in Indonesia. This typology includes independent tourism villages, advanced tourism villages, developing tourism villages and pilot tourism villages. These four typologies describe different stages of development of tourist villages. To date, there have been 14 tourist villages designated as independent tourist villages in the Special Region of Yogyakarta. However, the COVID-19 outbreak has affected the tourism sector both positively and negatively (Damanik et al., 2022; Hakim, 2020; Parwata et al., 2022). There have been many previous studies that discussed the adverse effects of Covid-19 on tourist villages. However, there is not much research that discusses these two </span><span class="font2">e-ISSN 2407-392X. p-ISSN 2541-0857</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">impacts, especially by comprehensively comparing four tourist village typologies in DIY. Thus, this research aims to identify the impact of the Covid-19 pandemic on four typologies of tourist villages in DIY, both positive and negative.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>LITERATURE REVIEW</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">The impact of the Covid-19 pandemic on tourist villages can be viewed from two different sides. On the one hand, the Covid-19 pandemic has brought significant losses, but on the other hand, there are many positive lessons that the Covid-19 pandemic has taught tourist villages in the world. All lead to post-pandemic tourism village sustainability. These impacts can be identified as in Tabel 1 below:</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Table 1. </span><span class="font3">The response of tourist villages to the impact of the Covid-19 pandemic</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Impact</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Source</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">The collapse of the local economy</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">(Damanik et al., 2022; Everingham &amp;&nbsp;Chassagne, 2020; Jeon &amp;&nbsp;Yang, 2021; Kristiana et al., 2021; Parwata et al., 2022; Sann et al., 2023)</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">Increase in social cohesion</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">(Everingham &amp;&nbsp;Chassagne, 2020; Movono &amp;&nbsp;Schey-vens, 2022)</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Increase in community awareness of the importance of reserve funds and technology use</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">(Alghamdi &amp;&nbsp;Al-ghamdi, 2022; Damanik et al., 2022; Parwata et al., 2022)</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">Increase in community awareness of the importance of environmental health</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">(Candia &amp;&nbsp;Pirlone, 2022; Damanik et al., 2022; Evering-ham &amp;&nbsp;Chassagne, 2020; Hakim, 2020; Jeon &amp;&nbsp;Yang, 2021; Seal &amp;&nbsp;Premalatha, 2022)</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Increase in new innovation of tourist attraction</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">(Damanik et al., 2022; Jeon &amp;&nbsp;Yang, 2021; Kristiana et</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><a href="http://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/eot"><span class="font2">http://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/eot &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span></a><span class="font2">2</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">development</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">al., 2021; Panzer-Krause, 2022; Par-wata et al., 2022; Rogerson et al., 2021)</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Change of work system and facility unit</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">(Damanik et al., 2022)</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Increase awareness of the importance of mitigation</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">(Kristiana et al., 2021; Rogerson et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2020)</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">Increase awareness of the importance of youth participation</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">(Kurniasih et al., 2022; McCartney et al., 2022; Panzer-Krause, 2022; Ro-bina-Ramírez et al., 2022)</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>METHODS</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">This research is qualitative research. The research was conducted in four tourist villages in the Special Region of Yogyakarta which represent each typology of tourist villages and different locations, namely the Pentingsari Tourism Village from Sleman Regency (Independent Tourism Village), the Kakilangit Tourism Village from Bantul Regency (Advanced Tourism Village), the Sosromenduran Tourism Village from Yogyakarta City (Developing Tourism Village, and Glagah Tourism Village from Kulon Progo Regency (Pioneering Tourism Village). Data was collected through an interview process conducted with each Tourism Village Chair. The Tourism Village Chair in this study is considered the key informant who knows best information regarding the impact of Covid-19 on tourist villages. The research data was then analyzed using content analysis techniques. This content analysis was carried out through eight stages according to Dey (2005) starting from finding a focus, managing data, reading and annotating, creating categories, assigning categories, splitting and splicing, data environments and increasingly connections, an producing an account.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>RESULTS AND DISCUSSION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">The discussion in this paper consists of two parts. The first part highlights and describes the impact of the Covid-19 pandemic starting from the aspects of finance, environment, product, technology use, adaptation, to institutional aspects. The second part highlights and discusses the impact of the Covid-19 pandemic on the opportunities and challenges for the sustainability of tourism villages in the future.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>The Impact of Pandemic Covid-19 in Tourism Village</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">As has happened so far, the Covid-19 pandemic has had a major impact on the world tourism sector, including tourist villages in Indonesia. The development of tourist villages as local economic activists has in fact has not escaped the detrimental impact of Covid-19. Based on Table 2. The collapse of the local economy is one of them. This economic downturn was felt by most of the tourism business actors. There have been many studies that say the same thing (Damanik et al., 2022; Everingham &amp;&nbsp;Chassagne, 2020; Jeon &amp;&nbsp;Yang, 2021; Kristiana et al., 2021; Parwata et al., 2022; Sann et al., 2023).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Even so, not all of this economic downturn has a negative impact on tourism business actors. Some people who make tourism a side job admit that they can still survive even though there is a decrease in income. Thus, this economic downturn will only have a detrimental impact on rural tourism communities who make tourism villages their main source of income, as well as tourism villages that cannot continue their tourism activities at all during the Covid-19 period, such as the people of the Kakilangit Tourism Village. In contrast to the Pentingsari Tourism Village where the tourism business community has other permanent jobs besides in the tourism sector as expressed by the Head of the Tourism Village as follows:</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">“Yes, surviving and fortunately, tourism in Pentingsari is not the main source of income. In contrast to other tourist villages that make tourism fees their main income. If we are teachers, we are still teachers, civil servants are still civil servants, farmers are still farmers, livestock farmers are still livestock farmers. But when there are guests or tourists it becomes a extra income for us. So, Covid didn't affect too bad.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">On the other hand, Covid-19 has also positive change. This can be seen from Table 2, the emergence of public awareness regarding the importance of reserve funds to survive in emergency time in all the typologies of tourist villages in this study. Not only the individual community, the awareness of the importance of owning and developing reserve funds so that they can increase is also considered important by the managers of tourist villages. During the pandemic, for example, the Pentingsari Tourism Village provided stimulant funds for the community three times during the pandemic. Currently, the Pentingsari Tourism Village is starting to plan to develop its reserve funds so that they increase further through Village Owned Enterprises (BUMDes). These results indicate that currently the community is more focused on increasing reserve funds for the development of tourist villages compared to reducing their financial needs (Damanik et al., 2022; Parwata et al., 2022).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The impact of good changes is also felt on the environmental aspect. The Covid-19 pandemic actually made environmental sustainability and cleanliness more concern. This condition is a good thing for which Pentingsari Tourism Village is grateful as expressed as follows:</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">“&quot;We are even grateful because it's like we have too many guests, we really have a lot of guests, when it's Covid, it's like now, we have better preservation, in my opinion. In the </span><span class="font2">e-ISSN 2407-392X. p-ISSN 2541-0857</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">end, we take the lesson tha Covid-19 maybe a way to make nature back to more sustainable”.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Similar conditions are also same with other tourist villages such as Ka-kilangit and Sosromenduran where Covid-19 has changed people's habits or lifestyle to become healthier. This result is in line with previous research that the COVID pandemic has encouraged the development of more sustainable and environmentally friendly tourism services (Candia &amp;&nbsp;Pir-lone, 2022; Damanik et al., 2022; Evering-ham &amp;&nbsp;Chassagne, 2020; Hakim, 2020; Jeon &amp;&nbsp;Yang, 2021; Seal &amp;&nbsp;Premalatha, 2022). The next good impact is increasing awareness of the use of technology in all typologies of tourist villages. For example, the thoughts of the Glagah Tourism Village state that Covid-19 is related to:</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">“Even though people cannot come to our village, we can still sell our local products.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Even though there are not many implementations of the use of technology, at least there is a change in the mindset of the community regarding the importance of the role of technology in the advancement of tourism villages. But unfortunately, in the effort to implement it, there are still obstacles as stated by the Kakilangit Tourism Village below:</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">“Already, but there are often have problems and I haven't finished with that problem yet. Money is received by another people. It makes me confused, but we prefer to handle reservation with our own team. That which is more reliable. For online bookings, we are looking for professionals. What often causes problems is that only yesterday we tried to close the toll road because it was often used by other people at very high prices. Suddenly we have paid, we have to serve and that's a lot of problems.” </span><a href="http://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/eot"><span class="font2">http://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/eot</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3">Apart from technology, Covid-19 has also brought positive changes in terms of work systems and existing facilities. Since Covid-19 emerged, of course every tourist village is aware of the importance of implementing health protocols. This is in line with previous research (Damanik et al., 2022). This awareness then brought changes to the tourism village policy. For example, the Pentingsari Tourism Village, which routinely sterilizes rooms before use, and the Sosromenduran and Glagah Tourism Villages, which continue to open tourism activities during the pandemic. This is a better way not to prohibit people who want to continue to run their business as stated by the Head of the Sosromen-duran Tourism Village:</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">“So, there are different opinions, but we have decided that we can receive guests but still follow the health protocol. So, we don't forbid people to make money. If anything happens it is the responsibility of the business owner.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The Covid-19 pandemic has also encouraged every community and tourist village to provide their health facilities. The provision of these health facilities comes from government assistance and some comes from non-governmental organizations such as the Tourism Villages of Ka-kilangit, Glagah and Sosromenduran. Uniquely, this phenomenon also creates new job opportunities, such as what happened in the Pentingsari Tourism Village:</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">“Covid has made almost every one of us have a sink. In fact, we end up buying a lot of sinks and selling them to community like this, so it becomes additional income, but we sell them cheaply.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This finding illustrates the other side of previous research which stated that Covid-19 had damaged some facilities due to disuse and lack of maintenance during the pandemic (Damanik et al., 2022). Even</span></p>
<div>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">time there were several attractions that were no longer running, so we moved on to the jeep tour documentation session.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This finding is different from previous research in that The Head of tourist village prefer to rotate the business community into the ongoing tourism sector rather than switching to other jobs. (Damanik et al., 2022).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Regarding to networking, the emergence of Covid-19 has also increased the initiation of collaboration. For example, the Kakilangit Tourism Village, which is actively trying to join the Astra Prosperous Village. Sosromenduran is also trying to establish cooperation with hotels in Yogyakarta to offer tour packages to tourists. Glagah Tourism Village is also collaborating with MSMEs in chili processing, which was unthinkable before the Covid-19 period. Apart from that, the Pentingsari Tourism Village will work with Village Owned Enterprises (BUMDes) to develop new destinations. This is in line with previous research (Panzer-Krause, 2022) but is a different finding from research (Damanik et al., 2022) which states that Covid-19 reduces efforts and the desire to collaborate with partners.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Another impact of the Covid-19 pandemic that is most visible in the four typologies of tourist villages is the increase in innovation in creating new tourist attractions. These results are in line with previous research (Damanik et al., 2022; Jeon &amp;&nbsp;Yang, 2021; Kristiana et al., 2021; Panzer-Krause, 2022; Parwata et al., 2022; Rogerson et al., 2021) that Covid-19 has pressured new alternative tourism activities to emerge to fulfill demand. In the Covid-19 conditions, creativity and innovation are important for all tourist villages to be able to survive, as stated by the Chair of the Ka-kilangit Tourism Village as follows:</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">“So, to survive, we make innovations and creativity. So, we are creating new products to survive and speed up </span><span class="font2">e-ISSN 2407-392X. p-ISSN 2541-0857</span></p>
</div><br clear="all">
<p><span class="font3">so, there is still a good impact from Covid-19, namely the addition of health facilities. We can see another impact of the presence of Covid-19 from the institutional aspect.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">From a management/regulation perspective, Covid-19 is pushing for changes that lead to the sustainability of tourist villages. Pentingsari Tourism Village, for example, does not prioritize the large number of visitors but is more selective in choosing visitors. Furthermore, the Kakilangit Tourism Village also made new rules regarding the resignation of the community as members of the tourist village. This is done to foster togetherness and unity among the community of business actors in the Ka-kilangit Tourism Village so that they strive to rise together during the pandemic as stated below:</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">“We set it to be like the relationship between the company and employees, so that when they don't want to fight the pandemic situation, we prepare a resignation letter and they are not allowed to register again. Those are losers who want to feel good. If it's not good, they leave. If you have resigned and your family is not allowed to register, our rule is like that.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The Sosromenduran and Glagah Tourism Villages also made changes to the management of the tourism villages. In the Sosromenduran Tourism Village, they are trying to add human resources from young people. This is undeniable considering that during the Covid-19 era, the role of media and technology has become one of the main forces to rise so that young people need to be involved. Whereas in the Glagah Tourism Village, they made changes by rotating employees so that everyone continues to earn income during Covid-19 as stated below:</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">“Collaborate with friends who are in digital marketing, because at that time there were workers who we shifted to documenting tourist jeeps. At that </span><a href="http://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/eot"><span class="font2">http://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/eot &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span></a><span class="font2">212</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">the recovery process, namely by creating tour packages with a background of local wisdom. So, there is material culture, there is behavioral culture, and there is performance culture which we package into an attraction. So, there is a kind of innovation but it is based on local wisdom.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Creativity and innovation are mandatory demands that cannot be negotiated. This is in line with previous research which states that there is no better time to make progress in society except after Covid-19 (Candia &amp;&nbsp;Pirlone, 2022; Everingham &amp;&nbsp;Chassagne, 2020). For example, the Pentingsari Tourism Village has innovated by creating a new attraction called 'Inspiration Garden' and the Glagah Tourism Village with a tourist jeep attraction on the edge of the lagoon. In addition, the Covid-19 pandemic is closely related to health and herbal products as one of the solutions. From this condition, new business opportunities emerge, such as traditional health</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">drinks such as lemongrass ginger, wedang uwuh, instant ginger, etc. These opportunities were captured by the following Pentingsari and Kakilangit Tourism Villages:</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">“Yes, at that time people had to drink something warm. So, those are the opportunities that we create new markets to survive. So many people still manage the Wedang Uwuh tourism business and I included this in the tour package, because until now it still exists. This is one of the Covid innovation.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Based on these findings, it can be said that Covid-19 is an important historical moment for the rise of innovation and new ideas, fighting spirit, and unity among the people of tourist villages in DIY. This is in line with previous findings that COVID-19 can strengthen social cohesion in increasing the resilience of the tourism business community (Everingham &amp;&nbsp;Chas-sagne, 2020; Movono &amp;&nbsp;Scheyvens, 2022).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">Table 2. </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">The response of tourist villages to the impact of the Covid-19 pandemic</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Theme</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Direct quotes of participants</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Fiance</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">The collapse of the local economy</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">• &nbsp;</span><span class="font2">Tourism activities are not our main job so we are still able to</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">survive (1)</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">• &nbsp;</span><span class="font2">Our economy was very affected because tourism activities were</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">our main livelihood and had stopped completely (2 &amp;&nbsp;3)</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">• &nbsp;</span><span class="font2">Even though our economy was affected, we were still able to</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">earn 40% of our usual profit (4)</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">Increase in community awareness of the importance of reserve funds</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">• &nbsp;</span><span class="font2">With Covid-19, there should have been a change in the way of</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">life of the people, namely saving part of the income as a reserve fund (2 &amp;&nbsp;3)</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">• &nbsp;</span><span class="font2">With Covid-19, it is important to keep a larger reserve fund in</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">case of an emergency situation (1 &amp;&nbsp;4)</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Environment</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Increase in community awareness of the importance of environmental health</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">• &nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font2">Sustainability and cleanliness of the environment are better</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">maintained (1)</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">• &nbsp;</span><span class="font2">Cultivating a healthy life, for example by providing a place to</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">wash hands and spraying in every house (2 &amp;&nbsp;3)</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Product</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">Increase in new innovation of tourist attraction</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">• &nbsp;</span><span class="font2">The inspirational garden emerged because of Covid-19 (1)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">• &nbsp;</span><span class="font2">In fact, Covid can employ many people because it pursues pro</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">duction, for example, the production of herbal spices which is</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">development</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">•</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">•</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">•</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">also used as a new attraction (1 &amp;&nbsp;2)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">So, we make new products to survive and accelerate recovery, namely making tour packages with a background of local wisdom (2)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">We have found ideas, namely how people cannot come to our village but we can still sell our products (4)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">We created a new attraction, a jeep tour on the outskirts of the lagoon (4)</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td colspan="3" style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Technology Use</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">Increase in community awareness of the importance of technology use</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">•</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">•</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">•</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">•</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Now we have formed an IT Team consisting of five young people to do digital marketing (1)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The use of technology for marketing community products during Covid-19 has been carried out until we are unable to meet market demand (2)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Previously, promotions were carried out only using brochures, but now they have switched to social media (3)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Technology training for digital marketing is very important after the covid pandemic (3 &amp;&nbsp;4)</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td colspan="3" style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Adaptation</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">Change of work system</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">•</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">•</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">•</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">The entire room must be completely sterilized by spraying after use (1)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Our policy may receive guests but still apply the protocol so that it does not prohibit those who want to make money (3)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">We see an opportunity that this covid can be circumvented with health protocols so that we never close tourism activities here (4)</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">Change of facility unit</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">•</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">•</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">•</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">•</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">Before covid-19, it could be filled with 3 or 4 peoples in one room of homestay, since Covid-19, a maximum of 2 people in one room (1)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">We have also started to build health room facilities on the camping ground (1)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Covid has made almost every house have a sink and it can actually become a new job because it can be sold to other peoples (1)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">We are also preparing health protocol equipment both independently and with government assistance (2 &amp;&nbsp;3)</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td colspan="3" style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Institutional</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">Change of Manage-ment/ Regulation</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">•</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">•</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">•</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">•</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">We are more selective in choosing tourists based on covid-19 exposure zoning (1)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">We made internal regulations regarding the provisions for the resignation of tourism business actors (2)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">We add human resources from young people (3)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">We shift human resources to attractions that are still running (4)</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">Increase in collaboration</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">•</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">•</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">We are trying to develop new destinations through collaboration We are trying to access cooperation with the private sector for the development of tourist villages (2,3, &amp;&nbsp;4)</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font2">The difficulty of increasing youth participation</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">•</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">•</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2">We still need the participation of young people who have the inspiration to take an active part in developing a tourism village (1)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The psychological burden, especially for young people, is enormous because they have left their parents' jobs as farmers to</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td colspan="3" style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><a href="http://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/eot"><span class="font2">http://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/eot &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span></a><span class="font2">214 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;e-ISSN 2407-392X. p-ISSN 2541-0857</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font2">focus on developing tourism but had to stop during the Covid-19 period (2)</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">•</span><span class="font2"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;It is still difficult for young people to be involved in the management of tourist villages because they have not yet made much profit, so they are more focused on their own work (3)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">•</span><span class="font2"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The process of nurturing young people as tourism business actors continues to be carried out even though sometimes it is still difficult due to economic interests (4)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Source : Authors' fieldwork, 2023</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Additional Information:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3">(1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Pentingsari Tourism Village</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">(2) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Kakilangit Tourism Village</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font3">(3) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Sososromenduran Tourism Village (4) Glagah Torism Village</span></p></li></ul>
<h2><a name="bookmark14"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark15"></a>The Opportunities and Challenges of Pandemic Covid-19 to Tourism Village</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">Based on this research, the Covid-19 pandemic has not only had an impact that is directly felt by tourist villages, both positive and negative, but has also created new opportunities and challenges. The first is related to finance. From the financial side, we know that Covid-19 has only crippled the economy of people who rely on tourism activities as their main income. Based on these conditions, the tourist village community must start thinking about the sustainability of their work by preparing alternative jobs or by innovating to create new job opportunities as is done by the Glagah and Kakilangit Tourism Villages. In this case, product innovation is the only way to survive the pandemic.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This spirit of innovation must continue to be instilled in the tourism village business community. This is in line with previous research that the collapse of tourism due to the COVID-19 pandemic forced many destinations to rethink their economic models by focusing on sustainability and innovation (Candia &amp;&nbsp;Pirlone, 2022).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">In institutional terms, the management of tourist villages must begin to develop the concept of a Business Continuity Plan (BCP). This is aimed at preparing continuity plans for tourist villages and the business communities for unexpected</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">conditions. Development can start by mapping potential and vulnerabilities, preparing and training the community in emergency conditions, preparing reserve funds, developing plans to recover and strategies to continue carrying out tourism activities in times of emergency, and collaborating. These six things are not all present in tourist villages in DIY. However, after Covid-19, there has been an increase in public awareness and efforts regarding the importance of reserve funds in emergency times. This condition still needs to be improved and integrated with other mitigation efforts (Kristiana et al., 2021; Rogerson et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2020). These results reflect on Indonesia's mainstay tourist village destination, namely the Mandalika Lombok, that mitigation by the government alone will not be enough so it needs community support, volition and innovation to make it happen. (Damanik et al., 2022).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">During the Covid-19 era, cleanliness and environmental sustainability were also better maintained. The pandemic condition also changed people's lifestyle to be healthier. This condition will ultimately change tourism trends where mass tourism will be replaced by tourism that prioritizes cleanliness, safety and environmental sustainability. (Candia &amp;&nbsp;Pirlone, 2022; Everingham &amp;&nbsp;Chassagne, 2020; Hakim, 2020; Jeon &amp;&nbsp;Yang, 2021; Seal &amp;&nbsp;Premalatha, 2022). In</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">this case, the benchmark for tourism development is no longer based on quantity but based on quality because tourist behavior in having tourist locations has changed along with the Covid-19 pandemic. This finding is in line with previous research that the pandemic has changed their preferences in choosing tourist destinations. In the end tourists will prefer nature-based destinations that are not crowded so as to reduce the risk of virus exposure (Evering-ham &amp;&nbsp;Chassagne, 2020; Jeon &amp;&nbsp;Yang, 2021; NZIER, 2020; Seal &amp;&nbsp;Premalatha, 2022). This condition become a challenge for tourist villages to provide tourist attractions and health and safety environments standards.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">On the other hand, human resources are still a challenge in developing tourist villages after the Covid-19 pandemic. Current conditions indicate that it is difficult to increase youth participation due to economic interests. In fact, the role of young people in developing tourist villages after the pandemic is very important. The process of regenerating tourist village management is still a challenge for tourist villages to this day. A special strategy is needed in approaching this. In addition to the participation of young people, the use of technology in the development of tourist villages still needs to be improved. In this case digital transformation is still a major issue. There are still few human resources who can innovate using technology in the context of a tourist village. This is in line with previous research that directing the ability of the village's millennial generation in using technology to actively contribute to village tourism is also an important strategy during the Covid-19 pandemic. (Kurniasih et al., 2022; McCartney et al., 2022; Panzer-Krause, 2022; Robina-Ramírez et al., 2022).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">villages but also independent tourism villages. This condition shows that in the conditions of the Covid-19 pandemic there is no truly safe tourist village. Independent tourism villages such as Pentingsari, which often serve as role models for other tourist villages, have also felt the impact of Covid-19, although on the other hand they have more resources to survive. Glagah Tourism Village, which is considered the most vulnerable tourist village because of its status as a pilot tourism village, has also been able to survive the impacts caused by Covid-19.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The impact caused by the Covid-19 pandemic on tourist villages is not only a negative impact. Based on the discussion in this study, many positive impacts were also felt by all categories of tourist villages in DIY. This positive impact can be seen in terms of finance, environment, social cohesion, youth participation, product innovation, management/ regulation changes, facilities, networking, and increasing technology use. This also changes our perspective on Covid-19 that Covid-19 is not always bad. Covid-19 is an important historical moment for the emergence of innovation and new ideas, fighting spirit, and unity among the people of tourist villages in DIY. Even so, Covid-19 still leaves new opportunities and challenges that must be accepted by tourist villages in the new era of post-pandemic tourism. These opportunities and challenges include the growth of new job opportunities related to health and local wisdom, the development of BCP in the context of a tourist village, the development of tourist attractions and health and safety environments standards, the improvement of human resources and the development of technology utilization. This result certainly has implications for the practice of developing tourist villages in DIY. Future research can continue the dis-</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">CONCLUSION &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font3">cussion regarding the strategies that need</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">to be taken in developing each typology of</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The Covid-19 pandemic has had its post-covid-19 pandemic tourism villages. own impact on tourist villages in DIY. This impact was not only felt by pilot tourism </span><a href="http://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/eot"><span class="font2">http://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/eot &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span></a><span class="font2">216 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;e-ISSN 2407-392X. p-ISSN 2541-0857</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark16"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>ACKNOWLEDGEMENT</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">We acknowledge the Provincial Government of the Special Region of Yogyakarta (DIY), Pentingsari Tourism Village, Kakilangit Tourism Village, Sosrimenduran Tourism Village, and Glagah Tourism Village for providing convenience to the first author for undertaking this research.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>REFERENCES</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">Alghamdi, N. S., &amp;&nbsp;Alghamdi, S. M. (2022). The Role of Digital Technology in Curbing COVID-19. In </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health</span><span class="font3"> (Vol. 19, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Issue &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;14). &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;MDPI.</span></p>
<p><a href="https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph19148"><span class="font3">https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph19148</span></a><span class="font3"> 287</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Candia, S., &amp;&nbsp;Pirlone, F. (2022). Tourism environmental impacts assessment to guide public authorities towards sustainable choices for the postCOVID era. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Sustainability (Switzerland)</span><span class="font3">, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">14</span><span class="font3">(1).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Damanik, J., Utami, S., &amp;&nbsp;Mayani, M. (2022). The Dramatic Fall of Tourism Villages Amid the COVID-19 Pandemic: A Reflection on an Indonesia’s Primary Tourism Destination. In </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Proceedings of the International Academic Conference on Tourism (INTACT) “Post Pandemic Tourism: Trends and Future Directions” (INTACT 2022)</span><span class="font3"> (pp. 507– 520). Atlantis Press SARL.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Everingham, P., &amp;&nbsp;Chassagne, N. (2020). Post COVID-19 ecological and social reset: moving away from capitalist growth models towards tourism as Buen Vivir. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Tourism Geographies</span><span class="font3">, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">22</span><span class="font3">(3), &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;555–566.</span></p>
<p><a href="https://doi.org/10.1080/14616688.2"><span class="font3">https://doi.org/10.1080/14616688.2</span></a><span class="font3"> 020.1762119</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Gowreesunkar, V., Maingi, S. W., Roy, H., &amp;&nbsp;Micera, R. (2022). REBUILDING TOURISM POST PANDEMIC -POLICY &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;RECOMMENDA-</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">TIONSFROM GLOBAL CASE STUDIES. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Emerald Open Research</span><span class="font3">, 1–5. </span><a href="https://doi.org/10.35241/emer-aldopenres.1114919.1"><span class="font3">https://doi.org/10.35241/emer-aldopenres.1114919.1</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3">Hakim, L. (2020). COVID-19 and the Moment to Evaluate Tourism Euphoria, Indonesia. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Journal of Indonesian Tourism and Development Studies</span><span class="font3">, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">8</span><span class="font3">(2), &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;119–123.</span></p>
<p><a href="https://doi.org/10.21776/ub.jitode.2"><span class="font3">https://doi.org/10.21776/ub.jitode.2</span></a><span class="font3"> 020.008.02.09</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Jeon, C. Y., &amp;&nbsp;Yang, H. W. (2021). The structural changes of a local tourism network: comparison of before and after COVID-19. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Current Issues in Tourism</span><span class="font3">, &nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">24</span><span class="font3">(23), &nbsp;&nbsp;3324–3338.</span></p>
<p><a href="https://doi.org/10.1080/13683500.2"><span class="font3">https://doi.org/10.1080/13683500.2</span></a><span class="font3"> 021.1874890</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Kristiana, Y., Pramono, R., &amp;&nbsp;Brian, R. (2021). Adaptation Strategy of Tourism Industry Stakeholders During the COVID-19 Pandemic: A Case Study in Indonesia. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Journal of Asian Finance, Economics and Business</span><span class="font3">, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">8</span><span class="font3">(4), &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;0213–0223.</span></p>
<p><a href="https://doi.org/10.13106/jafeb.2021"><span class="font3">https://doi.org/10.13106/jafeb.2021</span></a><span class="font3">. vol8.no4.0213</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Kurniasih, D., Rosyadi, S., Sabiq, A., &amp;&nbsp;Ahmad, A. A. (2022). Collaboration Challenges in Helping the Rural Creative Tourism Sector to Recover During the COVID-19 Pandemic. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">KnE &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Social &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Sciences</span><span class="font3">.</span></p>
<p><a href="https://doi.org/10.18502/kss.v7i9.10"><span class="font3">https://doi.org/10.18502/kss.v7i9.10</span></a><span class="font3"> 954</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">McCartney, G., Ung, C., &amp;&nbsp;Pinto, J.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">(2022). Living with COVID-19 and Sustaining a Tourism Recovery— Adopting a Front-Line Collaborative Response between the Tourism Industry and Community Pharmacists. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Tourism and Hospitality</span><span class="font3">, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">3</span><span class="font3">(1), 47–68.</span></p>
<p><a href="https://doi.org/10.3390/tourhosp301"><span class="font3">https://doi.org/10.3390/tourhosp301</span></a><span class="font3"> 0004</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Movono, A., &amp;&nbsp;Scheyvens, R. (2022). Adapting and reacting to Covid-19: Tourism and resilience in the South Pacific. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Pacific Dynamics</span><span class="font3">, &nbsp;</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">6</span><span class="font3">(1),</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">124–150.</span></p>
<p><a href="https://doi.org/10.26021/12509"><span class="font3">https://doi.org/10.26021/12509</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3">NZIER. (2020). </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Tourism beyond Covid-19 Is the future local and green? </span><a href="https://www.pce.parliament.nz/pub-lications/pristine-popular-"><span class="font3">https://www.pce.parliament.nz/pub-lications/pristine-popular-</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3">Panzer-Krause, S. (2022). Rural Tourism in and after the COVID-19 Era: “Revenge Travel” or Chance for a Degrowth-Oriented Restart? Cases from Ireland and Germany. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Tourism and Hospitality</span><span class="font3">, &nbsp;</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">3</span><span class="font3">(2), &nbsp;399–415.</span></p>
<p><a href="https://doi.org/10.3390/tourhosp302"><span class="font3">https://doi.org/10.3390/tourhosp302</span></a><span class="font3"> 0026.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Parwata, W., Gede, A. A., Gunawarman, R., Putu, N., Pradnyaswari, R., Putri, A., Deddy, K., Pradsandya, E., &amp;&nbsp;Kurniawan, A. (2022). Post Covid-19 Policy Strategy of Tourism Village as an Effort of Resilience and Sustainability of the Village: A Case Study in Penglipuran Tourism Village, Bali. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">The International Journal of Social Sciences World TIJOSSW</span><span class="font3">, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">4</span><span class="font3">(2), &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;287–299.</span></p>
<p><a href="https://doi.org/10.5281/ze-nodo.7421925"><span class="font3">https://doi.org/10.5281/ze-nodo.7421925</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3">Robina-Ramírez, R., Sánchez, M. S. O., Ji-ménez-Naranjo, H. V., &amp;&nbsp;Castro-Serrano, J. (2022). Tourism governance during the COVID-19 pandemic crisis: A proposal for a sustainable model to restore the tourism industry. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Environment, Development and &nbsp;Sustainability</span><span class="font3">, &nbsp;</span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">24</span><span class="font3">(5),</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">6391–6412.</span></p>
<p><a href="https://doi.org/10.1007/s10668-021-01707-3"><span class="font3">https://doi.org/10.1007/s10668-021-01707-3</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3">Rogerson, J. M., Lekgau, R. J., Mashapa, M. M., &amp;&nbsp;Rogerson, C. M. (2021). Covid-19 and Local Business Responses: Evidence from South Africa’s most Tourism-Dependent Locality. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">African Journal of Hospitality, Tourism and Leisure</span><span class="font3">, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">10</span><span class="font3">(1),</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">388–405.</span></p>
<p><a href="https://doi.org/10.46222/AJHTL.19"><span class="font3">https://doi.org/10.46222/AJHTL.19</span></a><span class="font3"> 770720-107</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Sann, R., Lai, P. C., &amp;&nbsp;Chen, C. T. (2023). Crisis Adaptation in a Thai Community-Based Tourism Setting during the COVID-19 Pandemic: A Qualitative Phenomenological Approach. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Sustainability (Switzerland)</span><span class="font3">, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">15</span><span class="font3">(1). </span><a href="https://doi.org/10.3390/su15010340"><span class="font3">https://doi.org/10.3390/su15010340</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3">Seal, M. M., &amp;&nbsp;Premalatha, P. N. (2022). REBOOTING AND RESILIENCE STRATEGY FOR TOURISM SECTOR THROUGH RURAL TOURISM IN COVID-19 PANDEMIC-A CASE STUDY ON ANEGUNDI VILLAGE, KARNATAKA. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">UGC Care Journal</span><span class="font3">, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">43</span><span class="font3">(04), 136–144.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Zhang, L., Zhao, J., Liu, J., &amp;&nbsp;Chen, K. (2020). Community disaster resilience in the covid-19 outbreak: Insights from shanghai’s experience in china. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Risk Management and Healthcare Policy</span><span class="font3">, </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">13</span><span class="font3">, 3259–3270. </span><a href="https://doi.org/10.2147/RMHP.S28"><span class="font3">https://doi.org/10.2147/RMHP.S28</span></a><span class="font3"> 3447</span></p>
<p><a href="http://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/eot"><span class="font2">http://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/eot</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">218</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">e-ISSN 2407-392X. p-ISSN 2541-0857</span></p>