---
layout: full_article
title: "The Use of Slang Words of  Bruno Mars Songs"
author: "Oviana D.Y Libing, I Nengah Sudipa, I Nyoman Aryawibawa"
categories: ujossh
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ujossh/full-98616 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ujossh/id-98616"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ujossh/full-98616"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1">Udayana Journal of Social Sciences and Humanities, Vol. 7 No. 1, February 2023</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">DOI: </span><a href="https://doi.org/10.24843/UJoSSH.2023.v07.i01.p05"><span class="font1">https://doi.org/10.24843/UJoSSH.2023.v07.i01.p05</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">25</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font5"><a name="bookmark1"></a>The Use of Slang Words of Bruno Mars Songs</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">Oviana D.Y Libing<sup>1</sup>, I Nengah Sudipa<sup>2</sup>, I Nyoman Aryawibawa<sup>3</sup></span></p>
<p><span class="font2">English Department, Faculty of Humanities, Udayana University, Denpasar, Bali, Indonesia </span><a href="mailto:ovianalibing@gmail.com"><span class="font2">ovianalibing@gmail.com</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2">English Department, Faculty of Humanities, Udayana University,</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Denpasar, Bali, Indonesia </span><a href="mailto:nengahsudipa@yahoo.co.id"><span class="font2">nengahsudipa@yahoo.co.id</span></a><span class="font2"> English Department, Faculty of Humanities, Udayana University, Denpasar, Bali, Indonesia </span><a href="mailto:arya_wibawa@gmail.com"><span class="font2">arya_wibawa@gmail.com</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstract: </span><span class="font2">This study aims to identify the types of slang words and the meaning of slang words implied in Bruno Mars songs. The researcher divides the data into two parts which are primary data and secondary data. Primary data was taken from the internet in the form of Bruno Mars songs’ lyrics. The previous study and journal were taken as the secondary data to support this research. The methods used in this study is the qualitative descriptive and documentation technique. The main theory that the researcher used is the theory of slang proposed by Eric Partridge (1954). The result of this study shows that there are two types of slang words that contained in Bruno Mars songs lyric. Furthermore the meaning of slang words that implied in Bruno Mars songs lyric is refers to him as a singer.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Keywords: </span><span class="font2">bruno mars, slang words, slang words types and the meaning of slang words</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">I. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;INTRODUCTION</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">According to swan (2005) slang is a very informal kind of vocabulary, used mostly in speech by people who know each other well. Another definition comes from Eble (1996), slang words are considered as style or fashion language like cloths, it is popular, entertainment, new, accepted in group, and slang words are also identified as group members. It means that slang words are like our fashion style that must be new, famous, that people like to use in society.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">According to Spolsky (1988:35), slang is a kind of jargon marked by its rejection of formal rules, its comparative freshness and it common ephemerality, and its marked use to claim solidarity in a group membership, is an important social force that has a major impact on language. Slang is primarily speech intentionally used to obtain some degree of secrecy. It may become a secret language.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Nowadays, slang can be found not only in daily conversation, and also conversations in movies, or in lyric</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">song. It is quite difficult to explain the reason behind it. Yet, people believe that using slang words in their literary work, such a song may attract more attention from viewers. People like using slang words because it’s efficient, simple, and expressive. Thus, the use of slang words has transformed into a mode.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">As explained above the use of slang words can be found in lyric songs. Bruno Mars is one of the singers that used slang words in his songs. One example of his song is 24K Magic, 24K Magic is one of the songs that used slang words. This song has achieved Grammy awards as record of the year. 24K Magic has some slang words for the example </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Girls, what y’all trying to do.</span><span class="font2"> The slang word that is used is </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">y’all.</span><span class="font2"> It comes from </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">you all.</span><span class="font2"> The word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">y’all</span><span class="font2"> has become widely used by many people not only to young ones, but almost everyone around the world uses it. People already use it, but when some entertainer like Bruno Mars uses slang </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">y’all</span><span class="font2"> it becomes more famous and trends of slang word are enhanced when it is being included in song lyrics.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">This study aims to identify and analyze the types of slang words and the meaning of slang words that implied in Bruno Mars songs lyric. Bruno Mars songs that used in this study can be easily heard from the online sites or music application. The genre of his songs is pop and R&amp;B. The songs of Bruno are interesting to be discussed because it contains the data needed in this study.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">This topic are interesting to analyze because slang words is a unique variation of language that many people love to use in their conversation. People in this era like to use something that makes them look trendy and unique. Use slang words can make the conversation more quickly to say and easily to understand, moreover the use of slang words can make conversation more attractive. Therefore this study is conducted to analyze the types of slang words and the meaning of slang words implied in Bruno Mars song’s lyrics in order to know deeply about the slang words itself.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Finally, this study can be used as a references for the readers, especially the student of English Department. This study can be useful for those who wants to know more about slang words, especially the types of slang and the meaning of slang that implied in song lyrics.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">II. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;METHOD AND THEORY</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">A. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Method is one of the most important points in doing a research or study. Research is a process or steps used for collecting and analyzing data or information to increase our understanding of a topic issue. The research method of this study was divided into four following aspects; data source, method and technique of collecting data, method and technique of analyzing data, and method and technique of presenting data. This study used a qualitative descriptive methods and documentation technique.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The data source used in this study are divided into two parts; primary data and secondary data. The primary data was taken from the internet in the form of Bruno Mars songs lyric 24K Magic, Versace On the Floor, Straight Up and Down, Calling all my Lovelies and Finesse. The previous study and journal were taken as the secondary data to support this research. The data chosen was the lyrics of Bruno Mars songs because it contained lingual data and it is very interesting to be discussed.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The songs used in this research belong to Bruno Mars studio album 24K Magic. The data were produced in America 2016, the year when the album was released. Bruno Mars was inspired by an album where he could capture the sounds of 1990s R&amp;B that he listened to and danced to during his childhood.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The nature of this study is library research, in which tha data were collected by documentation method. The data</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">were taken from the lyrics of Bruno Mars songs. This study was followed by some technique, are:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Downloading the data in the form song lyrics from the internet through the website </span><a href="https://genius.com/"><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://genius.com/</span></a><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Listening to the songs of Bruno Mars and reading the songs lyric more than once aims to understand the meaning of slang words implied in Bruno Mars songs’ lyrics. c. Finding and note taking of the words in the songs lyric which is slang words for making the process easier.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">In this study the data were analyzed by using descriptive qualitative method and theory of slang words proposed by Eric Partridge (1954) to identify the types of slang words and analyzed the meaning of slang words that implied in Bruno Mars songs lyric. The data were listening and read all of the songs lyric, then analyzed by using concept and theoretical framework that is relevant to the topic.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In presenting the data in order to make it easier to answer the problem of this research, this study was using descriptive method. Then the data that analyzed were presented in informal descriptive methods. Therefore, the data that has been found was present in word or sentences in the form of paragraph, in order to classify the types of slang words and described the meaning of slang words that implied in Bruno Mars songs’ lyrics based on the theory by Eric Partridge.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">This study discussed the types of slang words and the meaning of slang words implied in Bruno Mars songs lyric. There are some theory need to be explained to understand this study.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">B. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Theory of Slang</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Eric Partridge in his book </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Slang To-day and Yesterday</span><span class="font2"> mention a quotes from Drs. Bradley and Krapp said that “slang develops most freely, in groups with a strong realization of a group activity and interest, and group without this sense of unity.” Eric Partridge clarified that the different kind of slang are numerous, and I propose to treat of only the twenty-four most important: after all, there are limits.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">C. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Types of Slang</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">As mention before this research is discussed about the types and the meaning of slang words that implied in Bruno Mars songs lyrics. Here the researcher will explained the types of slang words that contained in Bruno Mars songs lyrics.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Public House Slang</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Public house slang is considered as a public house group of words or phrases that makes up for the smallness of the recorded vocabulary by the nature of the subject. It is genial, cheery, materialistic, but not gross nor cynical. The examples are below which taken from “</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Routledge Dictionary of Historical Slang</span><span class="font2">” by Partridge (2006):</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">-</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Booze-shunter</span><span class="font2">, means a beer drinker.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">-</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;War Cry</span><span class="font2">, means mixture of stout and mild-ale understood.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">-</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Round the corner</span><span class="font2">, means having had something strong to drink.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The term “</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">booze-shunter”</span><span class="font2"> used by the South-Western porters and guards who frequented the pubs around Waterloo station, originated the term, which soon became general among the police officers society. While the term “</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">war-cry” </span><span class="font2">has a satirical reference to the Salvation Army, which speaks stoutly in polite language. And the term “r</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">ound the corner”</span><span class="font2">commonly used by lower class people about the year 1895-1930. From the explanation above, it is clear that these slangs belong to public house slang because of them having relation with public house or we commonly called it as tavern.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Society Slang</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Society slang is commonly used in daily speaking and connected to society. Every society group uses some types of slang, and by association, those words or phrases become property of that group, something that defines them in a certain way. In the modern world, slang has become so much a defining trait of many groups that is impossible to ignore the impact it has had on western society. Unfortunately, much of the impact it has had is by underscoring social and class separations. Slang is part of communication in one form or the other. Even though slang usually has a negative assumption and isn’t widely used in all types of situations when people are not aware of it. They do not realize that the way they speak differs from the way that their predecessors spoke.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">3 RESULT AND DISCUSSION</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">This chapter is concern with the analysis of the data that is the lyrics of the songs 24K Magic, Versace On the Floor, Straight Up and Down, Calling all my Lovelies and Finesse. The data used because it was interesting to be analyzed and containing the data that were needed by the researcher.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">A. Types of Slang</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">There were two types of slang words from Eric Partridge found in Bruno Mars’ song lyrics. First was public house slang. In accordance with the characteristics of the public house slang and their nature of words or phrases are not gross cynical.Second, society slang is defined as a tendency of joyously, or jauntily over the object and practice of the slang user's.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">- </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Public House Slang</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">These are some of public slang words from the lyric song of Bruno Mars songs 24K Magic, Versace on the Floor, Straight Up and Down, Calling all my Lovelies and Finesse.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Y’all</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The slang </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">y’all</span><span class="font2"> found at minute 00:30. The lyric part is, girls what </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">y’all</span><span class="font2"> trying to do? 24k magic in the air. The slang </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">y all</span><span class="font2"> belongs to public house slang because </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">y all</span><span class="font2"> here is indicate to have meaning you all.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;‘em</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The slang </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">’em</span><span class="font2"> found in minute 00:49. The lyric part is, oh they don’t know? (Go on tell ‘em) I bet they know soon as I walk in. The slang </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">‘em</span><span class="font2"> belongs to public house slang because </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">‘em</span><span class="font2"> here is indicate to have meaning them.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Gangstas</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The slang </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">gangstas</span><span class="font2"> found in minute 01:37. The lyric part is, second verse for the hustlas gangstas (gangstas). The slang </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">gangstas</span><span class="font2"> belongs to public house slang because </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">gangstas</span><span class="font2"> here is indicate to have meaning gang member.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">d. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;I’d</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The slang </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">i’d</span><span class="font2"> found in minute 00:17. The lyric part is, there’s no place i’d rather be in this world, your eyes are where I’m lost in. The slang </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I’d</span><span class="font2"> belongs to public house slang because </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I’d</span><span class="font2"> here is indicate to have meaning I would, I had and I should.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">e. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;We’re</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The slang </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">we’re</span><span class="font2"> found in minute 00:26. The lyric part is, underneath the chandelier we’re dancin’ all alone there’s no reason to hide what we feelin’ inside right now. The slang </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">we’re</span><span class="font2"> in Mars song lyric Versace on the Floor belongs to public house slang because </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">we’re</span><span class="font2"> here is indicate to have meaning we are.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">f. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;I’ll</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The slang </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">i’ll</span><span class="font2"> find in minute 01:47. The lyric part is, I'll be right ready to hold you, girl you know you’re perfect from your head down to your heels. The slang </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I’ll</span><span class="font2"> belongs to public house slang because </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">I’ll </span><span class="font2">here is indicate to have meaning I will and I shall.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">g. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Nobody</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The slang </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">nobody</span><span class="font2"> found in minute 00:22. The lyric part is, and </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">nobody</span><span class="font2"> at the party droppin’it low like the way that you do. The slang </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">nobody</span><span class="font2"> in Mars song lyric Straight up and Down belongs to public house slang because </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">nobody</span><span class="font2"> here is indicate to have meaning no person and not anybody.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">h. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;We’ll</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The slang </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">we’ll</span><span class="font2"> find in minute 00:14. The lyric part is, yeah I know we’ll turn heads forever so tonight I’m gonna show you off. The slang </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">we’ll</span><span class="font2"> in Mars song Finesse belongs to public house slang because </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">we’ll</span><span class="font2"> here is indicate to have meaning we will and we shall.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">i. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Baby</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The slang </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">baby</span><span class="font2"> found in minute 00:27. The lyric part is, ‘baby, that's what you do (baby, that's what you do)’. The slang </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">baby</span><span class="font2"> in Mars song Finesse belongs to public house slang because </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">baby</span><span class="font2"> here is indicate to have meaning dear.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">- </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Society Slang</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">These are some of society slang words from the lyric song of Bruno Mars songs 24K Magic, Versace on the Floor, Straight Up and Down, Calling all my Lovelies and Finesse.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Shit</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The slang word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">shit</span><span class="font2"> found in minute 01:02. The lyric part is, ooh shit, I’m a dangerous man with some money in my pocket (keep up). The slang </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">shit </span><span class="font2">in Mars song 24K Magic belongs to society slang because </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">shit</span><span class="font2"> here is indicate to have meaning swear and unpleasant word.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bitches</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The slang word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">bitches</span><span class="font2"> found in minute 01:40. The lyric part is, bad bitches and ya ugly ass friends (haha) can I preach? (uh oh) Can I preach? (uh oh). The slang </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">bitches</span><span class="font2"> in Mars song 24K Magic belongs to society slang because </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">bitches</span><span class="font2"> here is indicate to have meaning with express displeasure and grumble.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Gotta</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The slang word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">gotta</span><span class="font2"> found at minute 01:49. The lyric part is, I gotta show ‘em how a pimp gets it in. The slang </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">shit</span><span class="font2"> in Mars song 24K Magic belongs to society slang because </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">shit</span><span class="font2"> here is indicate to have meaning got to.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">d. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Ain’t</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The slang word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">ain’t</span><span class="font2"> found in minute 01:55. The lyric part is, they ain’t ready for me, uh I’m a dangerous man with some money in my pocket. The slang </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">ain’t</span><span class="font2"> in Mars song 24K Magic belongs to society slang because </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">ain’t</span><span class="font2"> here is indicate to have meaning am not, are not, is not, have not and has not.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">e. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;‘cause</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The slang word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">‘cause</span><span class="font2"> found in minute 02:03. The lyric part is, ‘cause I ain’t ever been more for real, for real. The slang ‘</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">cause</span><span class="font2"> in Mars song Versace on the Floor belongs to society slang because ‘</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">cause </span><span class="font2">here is indicate to have meaning because.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">f. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Momma</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The slang word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">momma</span><span class="font2"> found in minute 00:10. The lyric part is, Girl, you bet your momma named you good lookin’ ‘cause you sure you look good to me. The slang </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">momma</span><span class="font2"> in Mars song Straight up and Down belongs to society slang because </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">momma </span><span class="font2">here is indicate to have meaning mother.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">g. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Damn</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The slang word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">damn</span><span class="font2"> found in minute 00:27. The lyric part is, you got me sayin’, damn girl break it down for me. The slang </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">damn</span><span class="font2"> in Mars song Straight up and down belongs to society slang because </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">damn </span><span class="font2">here is indicate to have meaning curse and swear.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">h. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Wanna</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The slang word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">wanna</span><span class="font2"> found in minute 00:26. The lyric part is, you say yo wanna go and have fun, well you ain’t the only one. The slang </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">wanna</span><span class="font2"> in Mars song Calling all my Lovelies belongs to society slang because </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">wanna</span><span class="font2"> here is indicate to have meaning want to or want a.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">i. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Gonna</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The slang word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">gonna</span><span class="font2"> found in minute 00:46. The lyric part is¸ if this is how it’s gonna be, I’m calling all my lovelies (calling all my lovelies). The slang </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">gonna</span><span class="font2"> in Mars song Calling all my Lovelies belongs to society slang because </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">gonna</span><span class="font2"> here is indicate to have meaning going to.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">j. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What the hell</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The slang word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">what the hell</span><span class="font2"> found in minute 01:18. The lyric part is, sendin’ me straight to voicemail, sugar, what the hell. The slang </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">what the hell</span><span class="font2"> in Mars song Calling all my Lovelies belongs to society slang because </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">what the hell</span><span class="font2"> here is indicate to have meaning what happened and what’s going on.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">k. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Shut that shit</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The slang word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">shit that shit</span><span class="font2"> found in minute 01:32. The lyric part is, shut that shit on sight, that’s right. We out here drippin’ in finesse, I don’t make no sense. The slang </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">shut that shit</span><span class="font2"> in Mars song Finesse belongs to society slang because </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">shut that shit</span><span class="font2"> here is indicate to have meaning be quite.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">l. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Yeah</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">The slang word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">yeah</span><span class="font2"> found in minute 02:12. The lyric part is, yeah we got it goin’ on got it goin’ on</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">don’t it feel so good to be us? (ayy). The slang </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">yeah </span><span class="font2">in Mars song Finesse belongs to society slang because </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">yeah</span><span class="font2"> here is indicate to have meaning yes.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">B. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Meaning of Slang</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">This study has found and analyzed the meaning of slang words that implied in Bruno Mars songs lyric based on the theory by Eric Partridge in his book </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Slang To-Day and Yesterday</span><span class="font2"> as follow:</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The slang word:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;y’all</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">From the lyric of Bruno Mars song 24K Magic he used this word in order to asked his friends to join the party with him and having fun. In formal words, </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">y’all</span><span class="font2"> here is indicate to have similarity meaning you all. You all is a word that usually use by people to communicate with their friends, family or colleague.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;‘em</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">From the lyric of Bruno Mars song 24K Magic he used this word because he wanted to show himself out to all of them that come to the party. The word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">‘em</span><span class="font2"> here is indicate to have similarity meaning them. Them is a word that usually used by people to communicate. The word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">‘em</span><span class="font2"> is only can use in informal situation because this word is informal word and it’s not suitable if people use this word to communicate in formal situation.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Gangstas</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">From the lyrics of Bruno Mars song 24K Magic he used this word because he wanted to express his happy feeling with his friends or a member of his gang. The word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">gangstas</span><span class="font2"> here is indicate to have similarity meaning a member of an inner-city street gang or a gang member. The slang word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">gangstas </span><span class="font2">is famous in adolescent and they often use this word in their communities. Bruno Mars used this slang word because he wanted to call his gang member in this song.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">d. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;I’d</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">From the lyrics of Bruno Mars song Versace on the Floor he used this word because he wanted to express his happy feeling with his girlfriend that he can dance together with his girlfriend. The word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">i’d </span><span class="font2">here is indicate to have similarity meaning I would, I had and I should. The slang word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">i’d</span><span class="font2"> is famous and mostly used in communities because it is simple and dashing.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">e. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;We’re</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">From the lyrics of Bruno Mars song Versace on the Floor he used this word because he wanted to express his happy feeling with his girlfriend that he can dance together with his girlfriend. The word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">we’re</span><span class="font2"> has similarity meaning with we are. The slang word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">we’re</span><span class="font2"> is famous and mostly used in communities because it is simple and dashing.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">f. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;I’ll</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">From the lyrics of Bruno Mars song Versace on the Floor he used this word in order to tell his girlfriend to feel comfortable and not be afraid because he is here for her. The word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">i’ll</span><span class="font2"> here is indicate to have similarity meaning I will and I shall. The slang word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">i’ll</span><span class="font2"> is famous and mostly used in communities because it is simple and dashing.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">g. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Nobody</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">From the lyrics of Bruno Mars song Straight Up and Down he used this word in order to tell that she is the best one, there is no person like her and he love her very much. The word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">nobody</span><span class="font2"> here is indicate to have similarity meaning no person and not anybody. The slang word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">nobody</span><span class="font2"> is famous and mostly use in communities because it is simple and dashing.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">h. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;We’ll</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">From the lyrics of Bruno Mars song Finesse he used this word in order to show off himself that he is the best and he is the center of attention and also this word is related to him and his girlfriend. The word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">we’ll</span><span class="font2"> have similarity meaning with we will and we shall. The slang word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">we’ll</span><span class="font2"> is famous and mostly use in communities because it is simple and dashing.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">i. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Baby</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">From the lyrics of Bruno Mars song Finesse he used this word in order to refresh his girlfriend that he adores. The word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">baby</span><span class="font2"> here is indicate to have similarity meaning dear or often used by woman and man to call each other when they have a romantic relationship. The slang word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">baby</span><span class="font2"> is famous and mostly used in communities because it is simple and dashing.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">j. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Shit</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">From the lyrics of Bruno Mars song 24K Magic he used this word in order to show how cool and naughty he is in this song. The word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">shit</span><span class="font2"> here is indicate to have similarity meaning swear, profanities or trivial and usually boastful or inaccurate talk. The slang word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">shit</span><span class="font2"> is famous and mostly used in society when they are talking.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">k. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bitches</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">From the lyric of Bruno Mars song 24K Magic he used this word in order to show himself out and insulting other people. The word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">bitches</span><span class="font2"> here is indicate to have similarity meaning difficult, or unpleasant situations or things that express displeasure and grumble. The slang word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">bitches</span><span class="font2"> is famous and mostly used in society when they are talking.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">l. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Gotta</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">From the lyrics of Bruno Mars song 24K Magic he used this slang word in order to refresh something that unpleasant. The word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">gotta</span><span class="font2"> here is indicate to have similarity meaning got to. The slang word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">gotta</span><span class="font2"> is famous and mostly used in society when they are talking.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">m. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Ain’t</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">From the lyrics of Bruno Mars song 24K Magic he used this word in order to tell people that he is the best, no one can touch him and people are not ready to face him. The word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">ain’t</span><span class="font2"> here is indicate to have similarity meaning am not, are not, is not, have not and has not. The slang word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">ain’t</span><span class="font2"> is famous in society and mostly used in informal situations when they are talking with someone.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">n. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;‘cause</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">From the lyric of Bruno Mars song Versace on the Floor he used this word in order to tell his good feeling that he had never loved someone that much before, but when he is with her he felt deeply in love. The word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">‘cause</span><span class="font2"> here is indicate to have similarity meaning because. The slang word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">‘cause </span><span class="font2">is famous in society and mostly used in informal situations when they are talking with someone.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">o. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Momma</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">From the lyrics of Bruno Mars song Straight Up and Down he used this word in order to express that there is no one that is more beautiful than that girl, she is the one who capable to stealing his attention. The word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">momma</span><span class="font2"> here is indicate to have similarity meaning mother. The slang word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">momma</span><span class="font2"> is famous in society and mostly used in informal situations when they are talking with someone.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">p. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Damn</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">From the lyrics of Bruno Mars song Straight Up and Down he used this word in order to express his good feeling about that girl and only that girl can make him feel amazed and say that word (damn). The word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Damn</span><span class="font2"> here is indicate to have similarity meaning curse, swear and often used to express</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">annoyance, disgust, or surprise. The slang word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">damn</span><span class="font2"> is famous in society and mostly used in informal situations when they are talking with someone.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">q. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Wanna</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">From the lyric of Bruno Mars song Calling all my Lovelies he used this word in order to tell his bad feeling to his girlfriend that she is not the only one who want to having fun. The word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">wanna</span><span class="font2"> here is indicate to have similarity meaning want to or want a. The slang word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">wanna</span><span class="font2"> is famous in society and mostly used in informal situations when they are talking with someone.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">r. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Gonna</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">From the lyric of Bruno Mars song Calling all my Lovelies he used this word in order to tell his girlfriend that she doesn’t need to contemplate what was going to haappened. The word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">gonna</span><span class="font2"> here is indicate to have similarity meaning going to. The slang word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">gonna</span><span class="font2"> is famous in society and mostly used in informal situations when they are talking with someone.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">s. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What the hell</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">From the lyric of Bruno Mars song Calling all my Lovelies he used this word in order to show his anger to his girlfriend. He get mad when his girlfriend send out a voicemail to him that doesn’t make sense and playing something he hate. The slang word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">what the hell</span><span class="font2"> here is indicate to have similarity meaning what happened, what’s going on or an extremely unpleasant and often inescapable situation. The slang word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">what the hell</span><span class="font2"> is famous in society and mostly used in informal situations when they are talking with someone.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">t. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Shut that shit</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">From the lyric of Bruno Mars song Finesse he used this word in order to not blame him and remain silent. The slang word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">shut that shit</span><span class="font2"> here is indicate to have similarity meaning be quite or stop talking a nonsense thing. The slang word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">shut that shit</span><span class="font2"> is famous in society and mostly used in informal situations when they are talking with someone.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">u. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Yeah</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">From the lyrics of Bruno Mars song Finesse he used this word in order to express his good feeling that he can achieve something because he is talented and he loved to shout out loud (yeah). The slang word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">yeah</span><span class="font2"> here is indicate to have similarity meaning yes. The slang word </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">yeah</span><span class="font2"> is famous in society and</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">mostly used in informal situations when they are talking with someone.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">4 CONCLUSION</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">From the previous discussion it can be concluded that; there are two types of slang words already found, those are public house slang and society slang based on the theory of slang word by Eric Partridge in his book </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Slang To-Day and Yesterday</span><span class="font2">. Public house slang is told about the word that is usually used by communities, meanwhile society slang is told about the slang word that is mostly used by society.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">This study also analyzed the meaning of slang words implied in Bruno Mars’ songs lyrics based on the theory of slang words by Eric Partridge too. The meaning of slang words found mostly refers to Bruno Mars as the singer of the songs. In analyzing the meaning of slang word it is based on the theory of slang words by Eric Partridge.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">ACKNOWLEDGEMENT</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">All praise goes to Jesus Christ for the endless blessing and strength Given to me to complete this undergraduate thesis. At this occasion I would like to extend my gratitude to some people for their true support, help, and encourage me to complete this research.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">My sincereness is extended to my first and second supervisor, Prof. Dr. I Nengah Sudipa, M.A. and I Nyoman Aryawibawa, S.S.,M.A., Ph.D for their thoughtfulness and kindness in giving me guidance, and knowledge. Their</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">REFERENCES</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">[1] . </span><span class="font4">Aryanti, 2018. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">“Slang Words Used by the </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Character in Neighbours 2: Sorority Rising” </span><span class="font2">Undergraduate Thesis. Denpasar: Udayana University.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">[2] . Ari, H. 2011. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“An Analysis Terms in the ‘American Gangster’, A Movie Directed by Ridley Scott” </span><span class="font2">Undergraduate Thesis. Denpasar: Udayana University.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">[3] . Aris, S. 2015. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“Study of Slang Word in Ride Along Movie”</span><span class="font2"> Undergraduate Thesis. Malang: The State Islamic University of Maulana Malik Ibrahim.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">[4] . Ayu, C., 2018. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“Slang in Sucide Squad Movie Script” </span><span class="font2">Undergraduate Thesis. Denpasar: Udayana University.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">[5] . Bruno Mars songs</span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">-</span><span class="font2">Genius | Song Lyrics &amp;&nbsp;Knowledge/ </span><a href="https://genius.com/"><span class="font2">https://genius.com/</span></a><span class="font2"> Bruno Mars songs-Genius | Song Lyrics &amp;&nbsp;Knowledge.html [Accessed December 15 2020].</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">[6] . Bruno Mars 24K Magic Album &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Cover-</span></p></li></ul>
<p><a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/24K_Magic_(album"><span class="font2">https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/24K_Magic_(album</span></a><span class="font2">) [Accessed December 15 2020].</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">support and guidance in giving me suggestions have contributed a lot in writing this research. Therefore, I could finish it on time.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">My gratitude is delivered to my former and current Academic Advisor Drs. I Gede Putu Sudana, M.A and Prof. Dr. I Nyoman Sedeng, M.Hum is also the head of English Department who has guided me during my study in English Department. My gratitude is also delivered to Dr. Made Sri Satyawati, S.S, M.Hum. as the head of the Faculty of Humanities, Udayana University for supporting my study. In addition, I would like to extend my gratitude to all of the lectures who have generously taught me. Finally, I would like to thank all of the staff in Udayana University, especially the faculty of humanities for kindly and providing the best services.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The most important of my life, my family, I would like to extend my gratitude to my father thank you for supporting our financial, and also my younger sisters and my nephew for their help, support and their prayer. They always pray, support and help me to be a better person, I hope I can make them proud in the future. I dedicated this writing to them.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">I realize that this undergraduate thesis is far from; thus, comment and suggestions are really appreciated for the improvement of this writing. I hope this writing would be helpful to the readers.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">[7] . Definition of song. Cambridge &nbsp;&nbsp;Dictinary-</span></p></li></ul>
<p><a href="https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/s"><span class="font2">https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/s</span></a><span class="font2"> ong?q=song+ [Accessed December 16 2020].</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">[8] . Eric, P. 1954. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Slang To-Day and Yesterday</span><span class="font2">. London – Bradford.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">[9] . &nbsp;&nbsp;I.G., Budasi., I.P.A. Bhuwana. 2018. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Analysis of</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Slang Words Formation Found in the Lyrics of Drake’s Songs.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">[10] . Liani, E. 2018 </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“Slang Words in Fast and Furious 7 Movie”</span><span class="font2"> Undergraduate Thesis. Jambi: State Islamic University of Sultan Thaha Saifudin.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">[11] . Marlyna, M., Tasha E.T. 2019 </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“The Use of Slangs in Instagram Among Malaysian Youths</span><span class="font2">.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">[12] . Merriam Webster Dictionary. 1982. Available from: </span><a href="https://www.merriam-webster.com/"><span class="font2">https://www.merriam-webster.com/</span></a><span class="font2"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;[Accessed</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">March 18 2021].</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">[13] . Muzayyanah. 2015 </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">&quot;A Description of Slang Translation in The Diary of a Wimpy Kid Novel&quot; </span><span class="font2">Undergraduate Thesis. Semarang: Walisongo State Islamic University.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">[14] . Ratna, P. 2010 “</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">An Analysis of Slang Language Types in Rush Hours 2 Movie</span><span class="font2">” Undergraduate Thesis. Jakarta: State Islamic University of Syarif Hidaytullah.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">[15] . Sri, R., 2016 </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">“The Analysis of Slang Words and Social Factors in 8 Mile Movie”</span><span class="font2"> Undergraduate Thesis. Yogyakarta: State Islamic University Sunan Kalijaga.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">[16] . Tessa, Z.H., Rio R.D.M. 2018 </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">&quot;Slang in America and British Hip-Hop/ Rap Song Lyrics&quot;</span><span class="font2">.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">[17] . Yanchun, Z., Yanhong, F. 2013 “</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">A Sociolinguistics Study of American Slang</span><span class="font2">”.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">[20] . Julie, C. 1991. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Life of Slang.</span><span class="font2"> Oxford Univ. Press. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">IZUMI</span><span class="font2"> 9(2):128–36. DOI: 10.14710/izumi.9.2.128-136</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">[18] . The Online Slang Dictionary. 2015. Available from: </span><a href="http://onlineslangdictionary.com/"><span class="font2">http://onlineslangdictionary.com/</span></a><span class="font2"> [Accessed March 17 2021].</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font2">[19] . </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">TRANSLATE in English, Spanish, French, and more with Cambridge</span><span class="font2"> (2021). Available at: </span><a href="https://dictionary.cambridge.org/translate/"><span class="font2">https://dictionary.cambridge.org/translate/</span></a><span class="font2"> (Accessed: 28 May 2021).</span></p></li></ul>