---
layout: full_article
title: "EFFECT OF AEROBIC EXERCISE ON BRAIN-DERIVED NEUROTROPHIC FACTOR AND COGNITIVE FUNCTION IN OLDER ADULTS"
author: "Ade Mayra Hosiana, Nila Wahyuni"
categories: sport
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/sport/full-100333 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/sport/id-100333"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/sport/full-100333"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Sport and Fitness Journal</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">E-ISSN: 2654-9182 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Volume 11, No.2, May 2023: 129-136</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font8" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>EFFECT OF AEROBIC EXERCISE ON BRAIN-DERIVED</span><br><br><span class="font8" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark2"></a>NEUROTROPHIC FACTOR AND COGNITIVE FUNCTION IN OLDER ADULTS</span></h1>
<p><span class="font7">Ade Mayra Hosiana<sup>1</sup>, Nila Wahyuni<sup>2</sup></span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font5"><sup>1</sup> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Biomedical Anti-Aging Medicine Magister Program Medical Faculty Universitas Udayana, 80234, Denpasar, Indonesia</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font5"><sup>2</sup> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Physiology Department Medical Faculty Universitas Udayana, 80234, Denpasar, Indonesia Email: </span><a href="mailto:ade.mayra@yahoo.com"><span class="font5">ade.mayra@yahoo.com</span></a></p></li></ul>
<h2><a name="bookmark3"></a><span class="font6" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark4"></a>ABSTRACT</span></h2>
<p><span class="font6">Aging is a natural process experienced by all living things. In aging, there is a decrease in the functions of various organ systems in the human body, including a decrease in brain function. Decreased brain capacity is associated with various risks of diseases such as dementia, which can impair the quality of life. One of the proteins in the brain that related to brain plasticity, learning, memory abilities, and cognitive function is brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF). Aerobic exercise is said to be able to increase serum BDNF levels and cognitive function in elderly individuals. The approach used for this study was a literature review. We look into and compare current literature on the effects of aerobic exercise on BDNF levels and cognitive function. The search method resulted up 540 articles. After eliminating duplicates and evaluating the abstracts, 496 full-text publications were then evaluated for eligibility. Following the evaluation of the entire article, 5 articles were added to the final review. It has been demonstrated that aerobic exercise raises BDNF levels in the elderly. Aerobic exercise also shown to improve several components of cognitive function. In conclusion, aerobic exercise is beneficial for the health of the brain, and it is recommended for older adult engaging moderate aerobic exercise, 150 minutes weekly.</span></p>
<p><span class="font6" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Keywords: aerobic exercise; BDNF; cognitive function</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark5"></a><span class="font6" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark6"></a>INTRODUCTION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font6">Aging is a persistent and progressive decline of intrinsic physiological function, leading to an increase in the incidence of illness and death.</span><span class="font3"><sup>1,2</sup> </span><span class="font6">The term &quot;elderly&quot; refers to people 60 years of age and older, who make up the fastest-growing demographic in worldwide.<sup>3,4</sup> The human body changes in many visible ways as we age, and body functions frequently deteriorate as people age.<sup>4</sup> The changes that occur with aging involve various organ systems. As the brain's ability to transfer messages and communicate declines with age, a variety of neurological illnesses are also linked to aging. The largest concern for elderly people is the loss of brain function, which includes personality loss in dementia (often Alzheimer's disease).<sup>3</sup> It is well established that certain cognitive abilities naturally decline with age, including speed of processing, many aspects of memory, speech, visual, spatial and executive function.<sup>4,5</sup></span></p>
<p><span class="font6">In aging, the anatomy of the brain structure also changes. Namely, there is a significant shrinkage of brain volume, where the fastest shrinkage occurs in the nucleus accumben, followed by hippocampus, compared to the other cortex. This shrinkage increases the risk of cognitive decline in older people.<sup>6</sup> One of the factors thought to affect hippocampal volume is the serum level of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF).<sup>7,8</sup> BDNF is a group of small secreted proteins, which also comprises nerve growth factor, neurotrophin 3, and neurotrophin 4. Due to its strong effects on synapses and high levels of expression in the brain, BDNF stands out among all neurotrophins.<sup>9</sup> BDNF is a key molecule associated in plasticity alterations related to learning and memory abilities.<sup>8</sup> One study imply that age-related memory decline is connected with reduced BDNF function, along with inactivity and hippocampus shrinkage.<sup>10</sup> Several interventions, such as exercise or the administration of antidepressants, increase BDNF expression both normally and in pathological conditions.<sup>8</sup></span></p>
<p><span class="font6">One of the common age-related changes is a decline in the effectiveness of cognitive functioning. However, many studies show that exercise can improve cognitive function. Additionally, recent study data indicates that the type of exercise training has an impact on executive function, with aerobic training appearing to have the biggest impact.<sup>11</sup> Exercise is thought to enhance cognitive function through the promotion of neurogenesis, angiogenesis, synaptic plasticity, decreased proinflammatory processes, and decreased cellular damage from oxidative stress, although the precise mechanism is unknown. Currently, research indicates that exercise training is most advantageous for executive function and memory, a broad term used to describe organizing and solving problems.<sup>12</sup> There are several ways to measure cognitive function, but The Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) is the most common, particularly in clinical practice.<sup>13</sup></span></p>
<p><span class="font6">A person's level of wellbeing is enhanced by the beneficial biological and psychological benefits of exercise on the brain and cognitive performance.<sup>14,15</sup> Aerobic exercise, both in short and long-term, can significantly increase BDNF levels.</span><span class="font3"><sup>16,17</sup> </span><span class="font6">According to a study, adults who are sedentary can benefit from short-term aerobic exercise because it can promote neuroplasticity and lessen the biological and cognitive effects of aging.<sup>18</sup> Another study found that aerobic exercise, particularly when done for 30 minutes each time, for no more than 150 minutes each week, and no more than three times per week, improved cognitive function in Alzheimer's patients.<sup>19,20</sup> This literature aims to analyze the correlation between aerobic exercise, BDNF levels, and cognitive function in the elderly.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark7"></a><span class="font6" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark8"></a>METHODS</span></h2>
<p><span class="font6">Secondary information acquired from the internet, numerous journal searches, journal reviews, and publications was used to perform this literature study. Literature review guided by database searches in the following ones: Google Scholar, Pubmed, and Science Direct. The following key phrases were employed: &quot;Aerobic Exercise, BDNF, Cognitive Function and Older Adult&quot; and the period of time was from 2013 through 2023. The inclusion criteria include: 1) scientific articles written in English, 2) literature in the form of scientific articles published in journals 3) Articles published in 2013–2023; and 4) discussion of scientific articles on the effects of aerobic exercise on BDNF and cognitive function in older adults. Exclusion criteria include 1) scientific articles that cannot be accessed in full text and 2) articles in the form of (i) non-original studies, such as meta-analyses, conference papers, comments, or consensus documents; (ii) case reports or case series; (iii) studies assessing other conditions; and (iv) incomplete data. Scientific articles that did not meet the criteria were excluded and not used in this study.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark9"></a><span class="font6" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark10"></a>RESULTS</span></h2>
<p><span class="font6">The search strategy initially identified 540 articles. After removal of duplicates and abstract screening, 496 full-text articles were subsequently assessed for its eligibility. Finally, 5 articles (21-25) were included in the final review as shown in Table 1. This process resulted in selection of 5 studies evaluated the relationship between aerobic exercise on BDNF and cognitive function of older adults.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Table 1. Studies investigating the effects of aerobic exercise on BDNF level and cognitive function in elderly</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5">Author and year of publication</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5">Sample &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Intervention &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Result &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5">Byun J and Kang E, 2016.</span><span class="font1">2</span><span class="font3"><sup>1</sup></span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5">24 women &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Participants &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;were &nbsp;BDNF (ng/mL) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aerobic</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">between the ages &nbsp;&nbsp;distributed into an exercise &nbsp;Baseline &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;exercise has</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">of 65 and 79 who &nbsp;&nbsp;group (EG, n=13) and a &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font6">• </span><span class="font5">EG: 19.07±1.51 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;resulted in</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">are capable of &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;control group (CG, n=11). &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font6">• </span><span class="font5">CG: 18.99±1.69 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;beneficial effect</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">carrying out &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The &nbsp;&nbsp;exercise &nbsp;&nbsp;program &nbsp;Aft<sub>er</sub> 12 <sub>wee</sub>k<sub>s</sub> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;on cognitive</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">routine daily &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;included senior brain health &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font6"><sub>•</sub> </span><span class="font5">EG<sub>:</sub> 20<sub>.</sub>14<sub>±</sub>1<sub>.</sub>31 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;function and</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">activities and &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;exercise (SBHE), which &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font6"><sub>• </sub></span><span class="font5"><sub>CG: 18.80±2.34</sub> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;BDNF.</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">communication &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;was performed four times &nbsp;<sub>MMSE-K</sub></span></p>
<p><span class="font5">but have not &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;per week for a total of 50 &nbsp;<sub>Baseline</sub></span></p>
<p><span class="font5">engaged in &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;minutes at an intensity level</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5">routine exercise in the previous six months.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5">of 9 to 14 on the rating of perceived effort (RPE) scale. The investigation lasted 12 weeks.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font6">•</span><span class="font5"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;EG: 26.23±1.64</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font6">•</span><span class="font5"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;CG: 25.19±1.83</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font5">After 12 weeks</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font6">•</span><span class="font5"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;EG: 27.08±2.10</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font6">•</span><span class="font5"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;CG: 25.09±2.12</span></p></li></ul></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td></tr>
<tr><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5">Kohanpour, et al., 2017.<sup>22</sup></span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5">By using simple sampling, 40 older people with MMSE scores between 21 and 25 were purposefully chosen.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">Participants were randomly assigned into 4 equal groups: aerobic exercise (A), lavender extract (L), aerobic-lavender (AL). and placebo (P). They each received their treatment for 12 weeks. For the first session, the aerobic activity consisted of an 8-minute run done at an intensity of 75-85% of one's maximum heart rate. After every two sessions, the running time was extended by one minute. As a result, at the conclusion of the 12-week training cycle, the running distance was 26 minutes. Two drops of lavender essence were given twice daily as part of the treatment.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">BDNF (pg/mL)</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Baseline</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font6">•</span><span class="font5"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;A: 110.25±28.61</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font6">•</span><span class="font5"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;L: 118.22±30.68</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font6">•</span><span class="font5"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;AL: 108.82±32.88</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font6">•</span><span class="font5"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;P: 110.75±26.07</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font5">After 12 weeks</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font6">•</span><span class="font5"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;A: 192.84±59.51</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font6">•</span><span class="font5"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;L: 138.15±29.62</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font6">•</span><span class="font5"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;AL: 179.81±62.69</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font6">•</span><span class="font5"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;P: 111.09±24.19</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font5">MMSE</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Baseline</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font6">•</span><span class="font5"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;A: 22.70±1.63</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font6">•</span><span class="font5"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;L: 22.80±1.75</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font7">•</span><span class="font5"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;AL: 22.50±1.35</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font6">•</span><span class="font5"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;P: 24.30±0.94</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font5">After 12 weeks</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font6">•</span><span class="font5"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;A: 24.40±1.42</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font6">•</span><span class="font5"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;L: 24.30±1.05</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font6">•</span><span class="font5"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;AL: 24.90±0.87</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font6">•</span><span class="font5"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;P: 24.20±0.63</span></p></li></ul></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5">In older MCI patients, 12-week aerobic exercise significantly increased blood BDNF levels and cognitive function, either on its own or in combination with lavender essence.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5">Ennete, al., 2020</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5">et</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">23</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5">52 participants age 60 years or over were divided into three groups with randomization: continuous aerobic training (CAT) n = 14; interval aerobic training (IAT) n = 17; and Controls n = 21).</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5">CAT and IAT included 30min cycling workout twice per week for 9 weeks (for the total of 18 sessions) on an upright electronically braked cycle ergometer</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">BDNF (pg/mL)</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Baseline</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font6">•</span><span class="font5"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;CAT: 194.9 (95.1– 315)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font6">•</span><span class="font5"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;IAT: 353.8 (109</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font5">452.7)</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font6">•</span><span class="font5"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;CG: 254 (128.5–542.2)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font5">After 9 weeks</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font6">•</span><span class="font5"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;CAT: 282.7 (191– 467.6)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font6">•</span><span class="font5"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;IAT: 244.5 (180.6– 380.7)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font6">•</span><span class="font5"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;CG: 403.7 (205–516.9)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font5">MMSE</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Baseline</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font6">•</span><span class="font5"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;CAT: 18 (16–21)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font6">•</span><span class="font5"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;IAT: 18 (17–19)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font6">•</span><span class="font5"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;CG: 21 (17–23)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font5">After 9 weeks</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font6">•</span><span class="font5"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;CAT: 20 (18.3–21)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font6">•</span><span class="font5"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;IAT: 17 (15–21)</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font6">•</span><span class="font5"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;CG: 19 (15–22)</span></p></li></ul></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5">Both types of aerobic exercise had no significant impact on plasma BDNF levels and cognitive abilities.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5">Liu, et 2020.<sup>24</sup></span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5">al.,</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font5">Volunteers (N=80) who were older than 65 years with MiniMental State Examination</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5">The participants were divided with randomization to conduct strength (S) or aerobic (A) training for 4 weeks in total.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5">BDNF (pg/mL)</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">Baseline</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font6">•</span><span class="font5"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;S: 23458.35±5418.26</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font6">•</span><span class="font5"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;A: 19253.6±7008.84</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font5">After 4 weeks</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font6">•</span><span class="font5"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;S: 25,413.81±7504.38</span></p></li></ul></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5">Both strength training and aerobic exercise improved cognitive funtion. Only</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5">scores ranging from 15 and 26 were involved in the study.</span></p></td><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0" style="font-variant:small-caps;">^^^^=^^^=<sub>bbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbb</sub></span></p>
<p><span class="font6">• </span><span class="font5">A: 21,200.85±7406.38</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">MMSE Baseline</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">• </span><span class="font5">S: 22.7±4.28</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">• </span><span class="font5">A: 23.87±4.65</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">After 4 weeks</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">• </span><span class="font5">S: 24.2±4.87</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">• </span><span class="font5">A: 25.87±3.36</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2">.......B......</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">aerobic exercise increased BDNF level.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5">Kang, et al.,</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5">The subjects were</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5">The aquatic exercises were</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5">BDNF (ng/mL)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5">Performing</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5">2020.<sup>25</sup></span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5">20 elderly women</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5">conducted for 60 minutes,</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5">Baseline</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5">aquatic exercise</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5">between the ages</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5">three times weekly for the</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font6">• </span><span class="font5">EG: 15.16 ±4.36</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5">regularly can</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5">of 68–80 years,</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5">total of 16 weeks, and the</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font6">• </span><span class="font5">CG: 15.71±3.05</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5">enhance the</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5">assigned into an</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5">intensity was &nbsp;gradually</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font6">• </span><span class="font5">After 16 weeks</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5">expression of</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5">aquatic exercise</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5">increased every 4 weeks</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font6">• </span><span class="font5">EG: 17.75±4.11</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5">BDNF, thus</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5">group (n = 10)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5">(40–50% of heart rate</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font6">• </span><span class="font5">CG: 15.51±3.02</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5">maintaining and</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5">and a control</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5">reserve (HRR) for 4 weeks,</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5">MMSE-K</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5">improving</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5">group (n = 10),</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5">50–60% of HRR for 4</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5">Baseline</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font5">cognitive</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5">utilizing</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5">weeks, 60–65% of HRR for</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font6">• </span><span class="font5">EG: 26.20±0.42</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5">function in</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5">randomization.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5">4 weeks, and 65–70% of HRR for 4 weeks.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font6">• </span><span class="font5">CG: 26.10±0.32</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">After 16 weeks</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">• </span><span class="font5">EG: 26.80±0.92</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">• </span><span class="font5">CG: 26.00±0.82</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font5">elderly women</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<h2><a name="bookmark11"></a><span class="font6" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark12"></a>DISCUSSION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font6">Regular exercise benefits in many possible ways to prevent age-related disease and promote longevity. Exercise significantly improved cardiorespiratory fitness and some cardiometabolic biomarker,<sup>26</sup> and it also has special advantages for the vascular and cellular systems that support a healthy brain. Exercise is involved in neuroprotection, synaptic plasticity, and neurogenesis.<sup>27</sup> Exercise is linked to better mental health,<sup>28</sup> a delay in dementia onset,</span><span class="font3"><sup>29,30</sup> </span><span class="font6">and better overall health and wellbeing.</span><span class="font3"><sup>31</sup></span></p>
<p><span class="font6">Aerobic is defined as &quot;living, active, or occurring in the presence of oxygen.&quot; Therefore, oxygen is the crucial element in determining the difference between aerobic and anaerobic exercise. Aerobic exercise is a form of cardiovascular exercise, as the name suggests. The muscles receive constant energy from the oxygen when engaging in aerobic exercise. Then, large muscles acquire movements from retaining energy. When engaging in this type of workout, one should move continuously and repeatedly. The various forms of aerobic exercise consist of: running or jogging, walking, swimming, rowing, cycling, jumping ropes, step aerobics, etc.<sup>32</sup></span></p>
<p><span class="font6">The aim of this review was to investigate studies that demonstrated how aerobic exercise affects BDNF levels and cognitive performance in older adults. Five studies were included in the present study. With regard to exercise protocol, one employed protocol of senior brain health program, one used running interventions, two used cycling, and one used aquatic exercise. The participants had a diversified condition with the inclusion criteria of healthy older adults and older adults with dementia, mild cognitive impairment (MCI), or Alzheimer disease. Two studies conducted to an elderly woman, meanwhile other studies conducted to both man and woman. Regarding the length of the longitudinal studies' intervention, 4–16 weeks range variation had been observed. Of these five studies, four researches showed beneficial effects of aerobic exercise in the BDNF levels and cognitive function.</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">In Byun J and Kang E study, a Senior Brain Health Exercise (SBHE) program was performed instead of the traditional aerobic exercise. SBHE performed to 24 healthy elderly women 4 times per week, of which training time was a total of 50 minutes each time with levels of effort ranging from nine to fourteen on the rating of perceived exertion (RPE) scale.<sup>21</sup> The BDNF level and MMSE-K score increased after the 12-week SBHE intervention. Similar results were obtained in a study conducted on healthy elderly woman by Kang et al.<sup>22</sup> Conducted a 16-week study, Kang et al. examine the effects of aquatic exercise on insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1), BDNF, vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), and cognitive function in elderly women. Aquatic exercise including warm-up (10 minutes),</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">aquatic exercise (40 minutes), and cool-down (10 minutes); three times/week. After the aquatic exercise regimen, BDNF levels, IGF-1 levels, and cognitive function all showed substantial improvements.</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">The effects of aerobic exercise in combination with the use of lavender essence on BDNF levels and cognitive function in elderly people with MCI are examined by Kohanpour et al. <sup>19</sup> For the first session, the aerobic activity included an 8-minute run at a 75%–85% HRR max intensity. After every two sessions, the running time was extended by one minute. According to the findings of this study, aerobic exercise for 12 weeks significantly increased serum BDNF levels and MMSE scores in older MCI patients, whether it was done alone or in conjunction with lavender essence. These findings are congruent with the study of Liu et al.<sup>21</sup> who found that aerobic exercise significantly increases BDNF level and cognitive function in dementia patient. In addition, Liu et al. study compared the BDNF level and cognitive function between aerobic exercise (cycling) and strength training for 4 weeks. The result is both groups showed increase of MMSE score, but BDNF level significantly increases only in aerobic group. This is consistent with the result of systematic review from Huang et al.<sup>33</sup> that involving 32 articles, which conclude that aerobic exercise, both short-term and long-term, can boost BDNF levels but strength training has no effect on peripheral BDNF. Other study conducted to elderly individuals also demonstrated that strength training does not influence BDNF level. The reason of this result might be due to a short-lived BDNF response, which might have been washed out when sampling.<sup>34</sup></span></p>
<p><span class="font6">The induction of neurotrophins/growth factors, most notably BDNF, is a crucial biochemical mediator for the beneficial responses to exercise in the brain.</span><span class="font3"><sup>35</sup> </span><span class="font6">The majority of the brain regions studied—prefrontal cortex, perirhinal, striatum, and hippocampus—saw an increase in BDNF concentration following aerobic exercise. However, this response was modified by age.<sup>36</sup> BDNF encourages the survival, differentiation, migration, dendritic arborization, synaptogenesis, and plasticity of neuronal cells, among other aspects of brain development. BDNF also increases neutransmitter release, postsynaptic responses, membrane exitability, gene expression, increased dendritic growth and spine density, and altered spine morphology all of which may help to support modulation of synaptic transmission and connectivity.</span><span class="font3"><sup>35</sup></span></p>
<p><span class="font6">Exercise, especially aerobic or endurance exercise has been shown to promote BDNF expression and enhance cognitive performance. According to several studies, endurance exercise increases levels of FNDC5, a protein in the muscle that is activated during exercise and released as irisin. PGC-1 controls the expression of the FNDC5 gene in neurons, and PGC1a/ animals exhibit decreased FNDC5 expression in the brain. BDNF expression is elevated when FNDC5 is forcedly expressed in primary cortical neurons, whereas BDNF is decreased when FNDC5 is knocked down using RNAi.<sup>37,38</sup> Exercise may have a direct impact on the production of BDNF in the hippocampi, but it also has the potential to have an indirect effect through peripheral processes. Exercise may cause the liver to produce DBHB (D-b-hydroxybutyrate), which is subsequently circulated throughout the body and transferred to the hippocampus, where it modulates BDNF expression by inhibiting HDAC (histone deacetylases).<sup>39</sup></span></p>
<p><span class="font6">Study conducted by Enette et al.<sup>20</sup> focused in seniors with Alzheimer Disease (AD). They comparing 3 groups consist of continuous aerobic training (CAT), interval aerobic training (IAT), and control group for 9 weeks. In contrast to the previously mentioned studies, this study demonstrated that BDNF level and cognitive state between the 3 groups are not significantly different. The results of this study are in contrast to previous similar studies conducted on AD, where aerobic exercise increased BDNF levels.<sup>40</sup> Ennete et al. study is the first study that compare the effect of two different types of aerobic exercise (CAT vs. IAT) on plasma BDNF levels in the specific group of seniors with mild to moderate AD. Furthermore, other additional variables, such as genetic diversity, metabolic abnormalities, or inflammatory processes, might affect an individual's basal BDNF synthesis and, consequently, the BDNF response to aerobic training.<sup>41</sup></span></p>
<p><span class="font6">The advantages of aerobic exercise for older adults are well-known. After a three-month intervention period,<sup>42</sup> changes in hippocampal perfusion were favorably linked with increasing fitness levels, which also increased hippocampus volume.<sup>43</sup> Numerous studies have also demonstrated that aerobic exercise improving global cognitive ability and memory among older adults with MCI.<sup>44</sup> Both the short-term and long-term advantages of exercise on cognition may be attributed to improvements in synaptic activity, blood flow to the brain, brain irrigation, and neural plasticity.<sup>45</sup> Exercise stimulated neuroplasticity and mitochondrial function in the hippocampus, thereby attenuating cognitive</span></p>
<p><span class="font6">dysfunction.<sup>46</sup> Several studies reported there is a strong association between aerobic fitness level and level of attention.<sup>47,48</sup> According to other studies, aerobic exercise may improve memory in older people, with higher intensity exercise possibly having the biggest benefits.<sup>49</sup> This could be as a result of high-intensity exercise routines induced greater increases in BDNF.<sup>50</sup> Apparently, the time period a person exercises also has an effect on BDNF levels. One meta-analysis offers solid proof that acute and ongoing (regular) exercise have an important influence on BDNF levels. A single exercise session raises BDNF levels, according to evidence from 14 research, with a moderate impact size. Additionally, compared to those who only complete acute exercise, regular exercise increases the degree of these benefits with higher BDNF responsivity, showing a moderate impact size.<sup>51</sup> From a systematic review, meta-analysis, and meta-regression on the various training load variables that affect the blood concentrations of neurotrophic factors, it is recommended engaging in aerobic exercise with moderate-high intensity (65% of VO2max), 2-3 times per week, for minimum 40 minutes of training session continuously in order to enhance BDNF concentration levels.<sup>52</sup> To be more practical, it is advised that older adults do 150 minutes of weekly moderate-intensity aerobic exercise.<sup>53</sup> If tolerated, vigorous intensity aerobic activity is suggested for greater and more intensive benefits.<sup>54</sup></span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark13"></a><span class="font6" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark14"></a>CONCLUSION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font6">Despite the paucity of data, this literature review found that both healthy older adults and elderly people with various diseases have higher BDNF level and cognitive function after aerobic exercise. With these results, for the greatest benefits, it is advised that older persons complete 150 minutes of moderateintensity aerobic activity each week. Given the importance of the topic, additional research is needed to identify the kinds, degrees of difficulty, and duration of physical activity that would be most effective in raising BDNF level and cognitive function in healthy aged people as well as in those with degenerative, neuropsychiatric, and metabolic illnesses.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark15"></a><span class="font6" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark16"></a>CONFLICT OF INTEREST</span></h2>
<p><span class="font6">No interest conflicts have been disclosed by the authors.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark17"></a><span class="font6" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark18"></a>ACKNOWLEDGMENT</span></h2>
<p><span class="font6">The authors appreciate the support and guidance of the Head and all staff of the Physiology Department Medical Faculty Universitas Udayana, Denpasar, Indonesia.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark19"></a><span class="font6" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark20"></a>REFERENCES</span></h2>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font5">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Young F, Maguire S. 2022. Physiology of ageing. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Anaesthesia &amp;&nbsp;Intensive Care Medicine</span><span class="font5">. Vol 23 (11):723– 726</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font5">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Preston J, Biddell B. 2021. The physiology of ageing and how these changes affect older people. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Medicine</span><span class="font5">. Vol 49(1):1–5.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font5">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Amarya S, Singh K, Sabharwal M. 2018. Ageing Process and Physiological Changes. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Gerontology. InTech</span><span class="font5">.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font5">4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Chalise HN. 2019. Aging: Basic Concept. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Am J Biomed Sci Res</span><span class="font5">. Vol 1(1):8–10.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font5">5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Harada CN, Natelson Love MC, Triebel KL. 2013. Normal cognitive aging. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Clin Geriatr Med.</span><span class="font5"> Vol 29(4):737–752.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font5">6. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Sele S, Liem F, Mérillat S, Jäncke L. 2021. Age-related decline in the brain: a longitudinal study on interindividual variability of cortical thickness, area, volume, and cognition. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Neuroimage</span><span class="font5">. Vol 240.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font5">7. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Brown BM, Bourgeat P, Peiffer JJ. 2014. Influence of BDNF Val66Met on the relationship between physical activity and brain volume. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Neurology.</span><span class="font5"> Vol 83(15):1345–1352.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font5">8. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Miranda M, Morici JF, Zanoni MB, Bekinschtein P. 2019. Brain-Derived Neurotrophic Factor: A Key Molecule for Memory in the Healthy and the Pathological Brain. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Front Cell Neurosci.</span><span class="font5"> Vol 13.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font5">9. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Leal G, Bramham CR, Duarte CB. 2017. BDNF and Hippocampal Synaptic Plasticity. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">In: Vitamins and Hormones.</span><span class="font5"> Academic Press Inc. p. 153–195.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font5">10. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Mizoguchi Y, Yao H, Imamura Y, Hashimoto M, Monji A. 2020. Lower brain-derived neurotrophic factor levels are associated with age-related memory impairment in community-dwelling older adults: the Sefuri study. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Sci Rep.</span><span class="font5"> Vol 10(1).</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font5">11. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Barha CK, Falck RS, Davis JC, Nagamatsu LS, Liu-Ambrose T. 2017. Sex differences in aerobic exercise efficacy to improve cognition: A systematic review and meta-analysis of studies in older rodents. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Front Neuroendocrinol.</span><span class="font5"> Vol 46:86–105.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font5">12. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Northey JM, Cherbuin N, Pumpa KL, Smee DJ, Rattray B. 2018. Exercise interventions for cognitive function in adults older than 50: A systematic review with meta-Analysis. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Br J Sports Med</span><span class="font5">. Vol 52(3):154– 160.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font5">13. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Riello M, Rusconi E, Treccani B. 2021. The Role of Brief Global Cognitive Tests and Neuropsychological Expertise in the Detection and Differential Diagnosis of Dementia. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Front Aging Neurosci.</span><span class="font5"> Vol 13.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font5">14. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Mandolesi L, Polverino A, Montuori S. 2018. Effects of physical exercise on cognitive functioning and wellbeing: Biological and psychological benefits. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Front Psychol.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font5">15. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Donnelly JE, Hillman CH, Castelli D. 2016. Physical activity, fitness, cognitive function, and academic achievement in children: A systematic review. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Med Sci Sports Exerc.</span><span class="font5"> Vol 48(6):1197–1222.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font5">16. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Kyun Jeon Y, Ho Ha C. 2015. Expression of brain-derived neurotrophic factor, IGF-1 and cortisol elicited by regular aerobic exercise in adolescents. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">J Phys Ther Sci.</span><span class="font5"> Vol 27(3):737-41.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font5">17. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Briken S, Rosenkranz SC, Keminer O. 2016. Effects of exercise on Irisin, BDNF and IL-6 serum levels in patients with progressive multiple sclerosis. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">J Neuroimmunol.</span><span class="font5"> Vol 299:53–58.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font5">18. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Chapman SB, Aslan S, Spence JS. 2013. Shorter term aerobic exercise improves brain, cognition, and cardiovascular fitness in aging. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Front Aging Neurosci</span><span class="font5">. Vol 12;5:75.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font5">19. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Zhang S, Zhen K, Su Q, Chen Y, Lv Y, Yu L. 2022. The Effect of Aerobic Exercise on Cognitive Function in People with Alzheimer’s Disease: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of Randomized Controlled Trials. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Int J Environ Res Public Health</span><span class="font5">. Vol 19(23).</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font5">20. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Jia RX, Liang JH, Xu Y, Wang YQ. 2019. Effects of physical activity and exercise on the cognitive function of patients with Alzheimer disease: A meta-analysis. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">BMC Geriatr</span><span class="font5">. Vol 19(1).</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font5">21. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Byun J-E, Kang E-B. 2016. The effects of senior brain health exercise program on basic physical fitness, cognitive function and BDNF of elderly women - a feasibility study. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">J Exerc Nutrition Biochem</span><span class="font5">. Vol 20(2):8–18.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font5">22. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Kohanpour M-A, Peeri M, Azarbayjani M-A. 2017. The effects of aerobic exercise with lavender essence use on cognitive state and serum brain-derived neurotrophic factor levels in elderly with mild cognitive impairment. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Almqvist &amp;&nbsp;Wiksell</span><span class="font5">.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font5">23. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Enette L, Vogel T, Merle S. 2020. Effect of 9 weeks continuous vs. interval aerobic training on plasma BDNF levels, aerobic fitness, cognitive capacity and quality of life among seniors with mild to moderate Alzheimer’s disease: A randomized controlled trial. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">European Review of Aging and Physical Activity</span><span class="font5">. Vol 17(1).</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font5">24. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Liu IT, Lee WJ, Lin SY, Chang ST, Kao CL, Cheng YY. 2020. Therapeutic Effects of Exercise Training on Elderly Patients with Dementia: A Randomized Controlled Trial. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Arch Phys Med Rehabil</span><span class="font5">. Vol 101(5):762– 769.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font5">25. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Kang D wang, Bressel E, Kim D yeon. 2020. Effects of aquatic exercise on insulin-like growth factor-1, brain-derived neurotrophic factor, vascular endothelial growth factor, and cognitive function in elderly women. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Exp Gerontol.</span><span class="font5"> Vol 132.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font5">26. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Lin X, Zhang X, Guo J. 2015. Effects of exercise training on cardiorespiratory fitness and biomarkers of cardiometabolic health: A systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">J Am Heart Assoc</span><span class="font5">. Vol 4(7).</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font5">27. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Vecchio LM, Meng Y, Xhima K, Lipsman N, Hamani C, Aubert I. 2018. The Neuroprotective Effects of Exercise: Maintaining a Healthy Brain Throughout Aging. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Brain Plasticity</span><span class="font5">. Vol 4(1):17–52.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font5">28. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Mikkelsen K, Stojanovska L, Polenakovic M, Bosevski M, Apostolopoulos V. 2017. Exercise and mental health. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Maturitas.</span><span class="font5"> Vol 106:48–56.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font5">29. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;George EK, Hemachandra Reddy P. 2019. Can Healthy Diets, Regular Exercise, and Better Lifestyle Delay the Progression of Dementia in Elderly Individuals? </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease</span><span class="font5">. Vol 72(s1):S37–S58.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font5">30. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Alty J, Farrow M, Lawler K. 2020. Exercise and dementia prevention. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Pract Neurol.</span><span class="font5"> Vol 20(3):234–240.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font5">31. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Abd El-Kader SM, Al-Jiffri OH. 2016. Aerobic exercise improves quality of life, psychological well-being and systemic inflammation in subjects with alzheimer’s disease. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Afr Health Sci</span><span class="font5">. Vol 16(4):1045–1055.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font5">32. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aydin SB. 2022. A Critical Review on Anaerobic and Aerobic Exercise: Which One to Choose? The Difference, The Benefits and The Risks. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Perceptions Reprod Med</span><span class="font5">.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font5">33. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Huang T, Larsen KT, Ried-Larsen M, Møller NC, Andersen LB. 2014. The effects of physical activity and exercise on brain-derived neurotrophic factor in healthy humans: A review. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Scand J Med Sci Sports.</span><span class="font5"> Vol 24(1):1–10.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font5">34. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Forti LN, Njemini R, Beyer I. 2014. Strength training reduces circulating interleukin-6 but not brain-derived neurotrophic factor in community-dwelling elderly individuals. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Age (Omaha).</span><span class="font5"> Vol 36(5).</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font5">35. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Park H, Poo MM. 2013. Neurotrophin regulation of neural circuit development and function. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Nat Rev Neurosci.</span><span class="font5"> Vol 14(1):7–23.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font5">36. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Pietrelli A, Matković L, Vacotto M, Lopez-Costa JJ, Basso N, Brusco A. 2018. Aerobic exercise upregulates the BDNF-Serotonin systems and improves the cognitive function in rats. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Neurobiol Learn Mem</span><span class="font5">. Vol 155:528–542.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font5">37. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Wrann CD, White JP, Salogiannnis J. 2013. Exercise induces hippocampal BDNF through a PGC-1α/FNDC5 pathway. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Cell Metab</span><span class="font5">. Vol 18(5):649–659.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font5">38. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Xu B. 2013. BDNF (I)rising from Exercise. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Cell Metab</span><span class="font5">.Vol 18(5):612–614</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font5">39. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Sleiman SF, Henry J, Al-Haddad R. 2016. Exercise promotes the expression of brain derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) through the action of the ketone body b-hydroxybutyrate. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Elife</span><span class="font5">. Vol 2;5:e15092</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font5">40. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Coelho FGDM, Vital TM, Stein AM. 2014. Acute aerobic exercise increases brain-derived neurotrophic factor levels in elderly with Alzheimer’s disease. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease</span><span class="font5">. Vol 39(2):401–408. </span><a href="https://doi.org/10.3233/JAD-131073"><span class="font5">https://doi.org/10.3233/JAD-131073</span></a></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font5">41. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Balietti M, Giuli C, Conti F. 2018. Peripheral Blood Brain-Derived Neurotrophic Factor as a Biomarker of Alzheimer’s Disease: Are There Methodological Biases? </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Mol Neurobiol</span><span class="font5">. Vol 55(8):6661–6672.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font5">42. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Maass A, Düzel S, Goerke M. 2015 Vascular hippocampal plasticity after aerobic exercise in older adults. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Mol Psychiatry.</span><span class="font5"> Vol 20(5):585–593.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font5">43. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Feter N, Penny JC, Freitas MP, Rombaldi AJ. 2018. Effect of physical exercise on hippocampal volume in adults: Systematic review and meta-analysis. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Sci Sports.</span><span class="font5"> Vol 33(6):327–338.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font5">44. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Zheng G, Xia R, Zhou W, Tao J, Chen L. 2016. Aerobic exercise ameliorates cognitive function in older adults with mild cognitive impairment: A systematic review and meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Br J Sports Med.</span><span class="font5"> Vol 50(23):1443–1450.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font5">45. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Ferrer-Uris B, Ramos MA, Busquets A, Angulo-Barroso R. 2022. Can exercise shape your brain? A review of aerobic exercise effects on cognitive function and neuro-physiological underpinning mechanisms. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">AIMS Neurosci</span><span class="font5">. Vol 9(2):150–174.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font5">46. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Park HS, Kim CJ, Kwak HB, No MH, Heo JW, Kim TW. 2018. Physical exercise prevents cognitive impairment by enhancing hippocampal neuroplasticity and mitochondrial function in doxorubicin-induced chemobrain. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Neuropharmacology</span><span class="font5">. Vol 133:451–461.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font5">47. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Tsai CL, Wang CH, Pan CY, Chen FC, Huang SY, Tseng YT. 2016. The effects of different exercise types on visuospatial attention in the elderly. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Psychol Sport Exerc</span><span class="font5">. Vol ;26:130–138.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font5">48. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Tsai CL, Chen FC, Pan CY, Wang CH, Huang TH, Chen TC. 2014. Impact of acute aerobic exercise and cardiorespiratory &nbsp;fitness on visuospatial attention performance and serum BDNF levels.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Psychoneuroendocrinology</span><span class="font5">. Vol 41:121–131.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font5">49. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Kovacevic A, Fenesi B, Paolucci E, Heisz JJ. 2020. The effects of aerobic exercise intensity on memory in older adults. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Appl Physiol Nutr Metab</span><span class="font5">. Vol 45(6):591-600.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font5">50. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Afzalpour ME, Chadorneshin HT, Foadoddini M, Eivari HA. 2015. Comparing interval and continuous exercise training regimens on neurotrophic factors in rat brain. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Physiol Behav</span><span class="font5">. Vol 147:78–83.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font5">51. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Szuhany, K. L., Bugatti, M., &amp;&nbsp;Otto, M. W. 2015. A meta-analytic review of the effects of exercise on brain-derived neurotrophic factor. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Journal of Psychiatric Research</span><span class="font5">. Vol 60, 56–64.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font5">52. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Feter N, Alt R, Dias MG, Rombaldi AJ. 2019. How do different physical exercise parameters modulate brain-derived neurotrophic factor in healthy and non-healthy adults? A systematic review, meta-analysis and meta-regression. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Sci Sports</span><span class="font5">. Vol 34(5):293–304.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font5">53. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Boulton ER, Horne M, Todd C. 2018. Multiple influences on participating in physical activity in older age: Developing a social ecological approach. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Health Expectations</span><span class="font5">. Vol 21(1):239–248.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font5">54. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Zaleski AL, Taylor BA, Panza GA. 2016. Coming of Age: Considerations in the Prescription of Exercise for Older Adults. </span><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;">Methodist Debakey Cardiovasc J</span><span class="font5">. Vol12(2):98-104</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">136</span></p>