---
layout: full_article
title: "IMPLEMENTATION OF POLICIES CONCERNING MANAGEMENT AND ENGINEERING OF TRAFFIC AND ROAD TRANSPORTATION AND PARKING IN UBUD SUB-DISTRICT"
author: "I Made Artayasa"
categories: ecs
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ecs/full-112679 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ecs/id-112679"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ecs/full-112679"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0">E-Journal of Cultural Studies</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">ISSN 2338-2449</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Nov 2023 Vol. 16, Number 4, Page 65-77</span></p>
<p><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">IMPLEMENTATION OF POLICIES CONCERNING MANAGEMENT AND ENGINEERING OF TRAFFIC AND ROAD TRANSPORTATION AND PARKING IN UBUD SUB-DISTRICT</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">I Made Artayasa</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Universitas Ngurah Rai Denpasar, Bali, Indonesia</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Email: </span><a href="mailto:made.artayasa@unr.ac.id"><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">made.artayasa@unr.ac.id</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font0">Received Date &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: &nbsp;26-10-2023</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Accepted Date &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: &nbsp;28-11-2023</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Published Date &nbsp;&nbsp;: &nbsp;30-11-2023</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">ABSTRACT</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Management and engineering of traffic and road transportation are programs initiated by the Gianyar Regency government with the aim of achieving an integrated transportation system that ensures safety, security, order, smoothness, regularity, success, utility, comfort, and efficiency throughout the Ubud sub-district and its surrounding areas. This policy aligns with the community’s purchasing power, public interest aspects (road users), environmental sustainability, spatial planning, and advancements in knowledge and technology. The research addresses the following issues: 1) how is the implementation of policies on traffic management, road transportation engineering, and parking in Ubud subdistrict, 2) what factors hinder the implementation of traffic management, road transportation engineering policies, and parking in Ubud sub-district? The research employs a descriptive qualitative approach, using the theory proposed by Merilee S. Grindle. The findings indicate that the management and engineering of traffic and road transportation, as well as parking, are not yet one hundred percent effective due to inadequate infrastructure, such as parking spaces for residents, workers, and tourists, and a lack of personnel both from the police and the Gianyar Regency Transportation Agency.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Keywords: Policy, Implementation, Management</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">INTRODUCTION</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Ubud is one of the tourism areas in Gianyar. It is known as a popular destination for both domestic and international tourists. As a tourist destination, Ubud offers tourism facilities such as entertainment venues, dining options, accommodations, and cultural attractions. Even during the evening, Ubud is always bustling, especially with the cultural performances along the Ubud main road. The vibrancy of the area brings about various effects on the local community, both positive and negative.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The tourism industry in Ubud began to flourish in the 1970s. The local community in Ubud started to open up to outsiders or tourists by offering their homes as accommodations and places for tourists to learn. With the arrival of tourists, the people of</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">E-Journal of Cultural Studies DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015) </span><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">ISSN 2338-2449 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font0">Ubud experienced significant benefits. Unfortunately, the increasing number of tourists visiting Ubud led to a reduction in agricultural land. Many farmers or landowners converted their land into tourism facilities such as homestays, shops, restaurants, hotels, and villas.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">With the evolving times, the problems faced during the early stages of tourism development in Ubud are significantly different compared to the present day. For instance, in the past, the local community had a limited command of foreign languages, leading them to use basic language skills to interpret the language of visiting tourists. Additionally, there were few tourism accommodations, with only the royal palace having a well-established hotel. Ordinary residents typically had only one or two rooms for visiting guests. Moreover, only a few artistic groups performed to entertain visitors. The transformation over time reflects the dynamic changes in Ubud’s tourism landscape.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">With the rapid development of tourism today, Ubud, which is not very spacious, has to accommodate hundreds of vehicles, both from tourists and local residents. Many tourists complain about the lack of adequate parking spaces, leading to a reluctance to visit Ubud. Often, both local residents and tourists park their vehicles on the side of the road, causing traffic jams.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Traffic congestion points in Ubud are primarily located on Jalan Raya Ubud, specifically from Campuhan Bridge to the east to the intersection of Patung Arjuna Peliatan. Many tourists and local residents park their vehicles on both the north and south sides of the road. As a result, passing vehicles have to move slowly. To exacerbate the situation, the congestion becomes severe when parents picking up their school children contribute to the traffic, causing even a 30-minute standstill. Another congestion point occurs along the stretch of Hanoman Street in Padang Tegal Selatan to the Pengosekan Mas Intersection. Here, the narrow road combined with dense traffic results in vehicles unable to move for about 20 minutes. Additionally, congestion is observed on Monkey Forest Street extending to the front of Ubud’s Thematic Market. In this area, employees, tourists, and local residents use half of the road for parking and passenger drop-offs, causing severe traffic jams. Lastly, congestion occurs on Suweta Street to SMA Negeri 1 Ubud. Workers, tourists, and local residents park their vehicles on the east side of the road and refuse to turn towards the front of Ubud’s Thematic Market.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">In the complex situation outlined above, the local government is present to provide public services and ensure sustainable tourism in Ubud. As a village region, Ubud has defined boundaries. The boundaries of Ubud sub-district are Tegallalang District to the north, Peliatan Village to the east, Mas Village to the south, and Sayan Village to the west.</span></p>
<p><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font0">In this context, the local government and traditional village authorities collaborate to build parking facilities for tourist vehicles in the Ubud area and provide shuttle services. The local government designates parking locations around Ubud sub-district, including Pura Batukaru in Ubud Traditional Village to accommodate cars or minibusses. Additionally, in the Padang Tegal Traditional Village area, several parking spaces are available. For local residents in the northern part, specifically in Bale Banjar Padang Tegal Kaja and on Gaotama Selatan Street. In the southern part, parking is provided up to SD Negeri 1 Ubud, including the Mongkey Forest area, catering to various vehicles such as motorcycles, cars, and large buses. At the Mongkey Forest Central Parking in Padang Tegal, a mini-bus is available to transport tourists and workers who park their vehicles in the Mongkey Forest tourist area. Below is data on the number of parking locations in the Ubud sub-district area.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Table 1.1 Parking Location</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td rowspan="2" style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:line-through;">No</span></p></td><td rowspan="2" style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">Parking Lot</span></p></td><td colspan="3" style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Transportation type</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Motorcycle</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Car</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Bus</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">1</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Pura Batukaru</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">-</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">100</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">-</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">2</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Basement Br. Padang Tegal Kaja</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">175</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">-</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">-</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">3</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">Gautama Selatan</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">150</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">-</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font0">-</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">4</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">Sentral Parkir Mongkey Forest</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">300</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">400</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">20</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font0">Source: Table prepared by Researcher</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">In 2015, the Local Government collaborated with the Bandung Institute of Technology to develop an implementation scheme for integrating transportation and tourism systems based on local wisdom in the Ubud tourism area and its surroundings. To ensure security, safety, order, and smooth traffic flow, as well as efficient parking services, integrated parking management, traffic engineering, and road transportation management are required as part of a unified transportation system in the Ubud subdistrict and its vicinity. As a response to this need, Gianyar Regency Government issued Regulation Number 57 of 2018 concerning Traffic Management, Engineering, Road Transportation, and Parking in the Ubud tourism area. This regulation aims to establish a comprehensive framework for managing traffic and transportation to enhance safety and efficiency in the Ubud tourism region.</span></p>
<p><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font0">PROBLEM FORMULATIONS</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Based on the above discussion, there are several problem formulations as follows. 1. How is the implementation of policies regarding management and engineering of traffic and road transportation and parking in Ubud sub-district?</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What are the obstacles in the implementation of policies regarding traffic management, road transportation engineering, and parking in Ubud sub-district?</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">THEORETICAL BASIS</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The implementation of policies is the process of carrying out policies to achieve results. In this research, the implementation refers to the execution of Gianyar Regency Regulation Number 57 of 2018 concerning Traffic Management and Engineering, Road Transportation, and Parking in the Ubud Tourism Area.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Based on several theories and criteria for implementing the above policy, in this research, the researcher employs the implementation theory proposed by Merilee S. Grindle (1980). This approach is known as “Implementation as A Political and Administrative Process.” According to Grindle, the success of public policy implementation can be measured by the achievement of outcomes (whether the goals are attained or not). This can be assessed through two main aspects:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Viewed from the process, by questioning whether the implementation of the policy aligns with what is specified in the design, referring to the policy actions.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Whether the policy objectives are achieved. This dimension is measured by examining two factors:</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The impact or effects on individuals and groups within the society.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The level of change that occurs and the acceptance of the target groups regarding the changes.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The success of public policy implementation, according to Grindle, is also highly determined by the level of implementability, which consists of the Content of Policy and Context of Policy (1980:5).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">A. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Content of policy, according to Grindle is:</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Interest Affected</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Interest affected is related to various interests that influence the implementation of a policy. This indicator argues that the implementation of a policy inevitably involves</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">E-Journal of Cultural Studies</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">ISSN 2338-2449 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font0">many interests, and the extent to which these interests influence its implementation is what needs to be further understood.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Type of Benefits</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">In this point, the content of policy seeks to demonstrate or explain that a policy should encompass various types of benefits that indicate the positive impact resulting from the implementation of the intended policy.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Extent of Change Envision</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Each policy has specific targets it aims to achieve. The content of policy, as explained in this point, focuses on how significant the desired changes through policy implementation should be and the importance of having a clear scale.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">d. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Site of Decision-making</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Decision-making in a policy plays a crucial role in its implementation. Therefore, in this section, it should be explained where the decision-making lies in a policy that will be implemented.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">e. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Program Implementor</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">In executing a policy or program, it must be supported by competent and capable policy implementation for the success of the policy. This information should be well-documented or clearly presented in this section.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">f. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Resources Commited</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The implementation of a policy also needs to be supported by adequate resources to ensure its successful execution.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">B. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Context of policy, according to Grindle is:</span></p></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Power, Interest, and Strategy of Actor Involved</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">In a policy, it is also essential to consider the power dynamics, interests, and strategies employed by the actors involved to facilitate the smooth implementation of the policy.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Institusion and Regime Characteristic</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The environment in which a policy is implemented also influences its success. In this section, the characteristics of an institution that will contribute to influencing a policy are explained.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Complince and Responsiveness (level of compliance and response from implementor)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Another important aspect in the implementation process of a policy is the decisions and responses from the implementers in addressing a policy.</span></p>
<p><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font0">Based on the research objective, which is to understand the implementation of traffic management, road transportation engineering, and parking, this study utilizes a qualitative approach.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">According to Sugiyono, as cited by Harbani Pasalong, qualitative research is a research method used to investigate natural objects. In contrast to experiments, qualitative research involves the researcher as the key instrument. Data collection techniques are done through triangulation or a combination of various sources. Data analysis is inductive, and the results of qualitative research emphasize meanings rather than generalizations (Sugiyono, 2016: 161). In other words, qualitative research is methods to explore and understand the meanings that individuals or a group of people attribute to social or human issues.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Based on the above argument, the researcher will conduct research on the object to be studied, namely the Implementation of Gianyar Regency Regulation Number 57 of 2018 regarding traffic management, road transportation engineering, and parking in the Ubud tourism area.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">DISCUSSION</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Implementation of Policies regarding Management and Engineering of Traffic and Road Transportation and Parking in Ubud Sub-district</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Ubud is one of the tourist areas located in the Gianyar Regency. As a tourist destination, Ubud is characterized by its cultural and traditional customs, which never cease daily. Tourists can witness cultural attractions or dances along the streets of Ubud. However, with the passage of time, Ubud has encountered various issues related to its tourism development. On one hand, the number of tourist visits has increased, employment opportunities have expanded, and the local economy in Ubud has improved. On the other hand, Ubud has faced congestion at several points, leading to undesirable consequences. Visitors violate traffic rules, some tourists opt for other destinations due to the traffic situation, and individuals become impatient or stressed while driving.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Furthermore, to achieve the objectives of this research, the researcher uses the policy implementation theory proposed by Merilee S. Grindle, which is divided into two variables: 1) policy content and 2) implementation environment.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Interest Affected</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">In carrying out the implementation of public policy, it is closely related to various interests that influence the policy implementation. This indicator argues that the</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">E-Journal of Cultural Studies DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015) </span><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">ISSN 2338-2449 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font0">implementation of a policy inevitably involves many interests, and the extent to which these interests influence its implementation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">From this variable, the researcher concludes that the stakeholders have been accommodated by the authorities. It is evident that the involved parties have performed their tasks well; for example, the government has provided parking spaces and no-parking signs, while the police have fulfilled their functions. If there are drivers who violate the rules, they will be punished with penalties on the spot and their tires deflated. This is done to create a deterrent effect on the community that violates the rules.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Type of Benefits</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">In carrying out a policy implementation, it is essential to explain the policy, and there should be benefits that indicate the positive and negative impacts resulting from the implementation of the intended policy.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Based on the researcher’s observations, the achieved benefits include the regulation of illegal parking, which has contributed to the smooth flow of traffic in Ubud. Traffic has become more fluent, tourists are pleased to visit Ubud, and both the local community and workers in Ubud have become more orderly in traffic. The number of visiting tourists has increased, contributing to a significant boost in the economy for both the local community and workers, although it may not be the same as before the COVID-19 pandemic.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Extent of Change Envision</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Every policy has specific targets it aims to achieve. The degree of change intended through the implementation of a policy should have a clear scale.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">From this variable, the researcher concludes that the degree of change has been achieved, as evidenced by the compliance of the community and tourism workers in orderly parking and traffic. Now, workers park in designated parking areas, some park at their homes, some pay for parking, and others park in the Ubud field. It is hoped that the community will continue to adhere to parking regulations and remain consistent, setting an example for visiting tourists.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">d. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Site of decision-making</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">Decision-making in a policy plays a crucial role in its implementation. Therefore, in this section, it should be explained where the decision-making lies in a policy that will be</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">E-Journal of Cultural Studies</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">ISSN 2338-2449 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font0">implemented.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">From this variable, the researcher concludes that the decision-making location is appropriate, even though it is somewhat delayed. However, the decision to regulate illegal parking in Ubud is commendable. Moreover, this parking regulation has been eagerly awaited by the Ubud community. Typically, tourist areas face issues with vehicle capacity. In addition to congestion, there are other problems that need to be addressed, such as waste management, uncontrolled construction, and the presence of homeless people and beggars in the Ubud area.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">e. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Program implementor</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">In implementing a policy or program, it should be supported by policy implementers who are competent and credible.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">From this variable, the researcher concludes that the program implementation is underway. Before taking enforcement actions, the officers and supporting parties hold a joint briefing to align perceptions to avoid miscommunication during enforcement. The police, before taking enforcement measures, inform the community to move their vehicles to the designated areas. If violations persist, the vehicles will be towed and the tires deflated by the transportation agency as a deterrent effect.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">f. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Resources Commited</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The implementation of a policy also needs to be supported by supporting resources to ensure its successful execution.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">From this variable, the researcher concludes that human resources and supporting resources are good but not yet optimal. The addition of traffic control officers and personnel for enforcement is needed to enhance the effectiveness of the policy implementation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Implementation Context</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Power, Interest, and Strategy of Actor Involved</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">In a policy, it is also essential to consider the power dynamics, interests, and strategies employed by the actors involved to facilitate the smooth implementation of the policy.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">From this variable, the researcher concludes that the Regional Government has carried out its duties in accordance with their respective functions. The local government</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">E-Journal of Cultural Studies</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">ISSN 2338-2449 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font0">has conducted socialization with entrepreneurs, workers, and the surrounding community to park in designated areas. The police have collaborated with community leaders to promote the regulation of parking. Similarly, the traditional village authorities have conducted socialization with the village residents and property owners and workers to park in the designated areas.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Institusion and Regime Characteristic</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The environment in which a policy is implemented also influences its success. In this section, the characteristics of an institution that will affect a policy are explained. From this variable, the researcher concludes that the characteristics of the institutions are functioning according to their respective roles. For example, the police take humane actions towards the community who violate regulations. Similarly, the transportation agency has installed no-parking signs and also participates in enforcement by coordinating with the police. The Traditional Village authority has also conducted socialization with the community and village residents to have parking spaces at home or use the designated areas, and landlords are required to provide parking spaces for their employees.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Level of Compliance and the Existence of Responses from Implementers</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The most crucial aspect in the implementation process of a policy is the decision and response from the implementers in addressing a policy.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">From this variable, the researcher concludes that the level of compliance and response from the community is good. The community and residents are obedient in traffic matters. People who used to park their vehicles on the road now park them inside their homes. Similarly, tourism accommodation owners, such as art shops and restaurants, have collaborated with landlords to provide parking spaces or rent spaces for their employees. Meanwhile, residents with four-wheeled vehicles rent parking spaces or park in Mongkey Forest. However, there are still some individuals, both from the community and tourists, who park indiscriminately. This issue continues to be reminded, emphasizing the importance of following traffic regulations and setting an example for others.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">The Obstacles in Implementing Policies on Management and Engineering of Traffic and Road Transport and Parking in the Ubud sub-district</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">In the implementation of the policy on traffic management and parking engineering</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">E-Journal of Cultural Studies DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015) </span><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">ISSN 2338-2449 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font0">in the Ubud sub-district, it is not free from obstacles that hinder the implementation process. It is hoped that the crackdown on illegal parking will continue, and solutions will be sought for future challenges.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Based on interviews with several informants, the researcher found several obstacles that hinder the implementation of cracking down on illegal parking, as outlined below.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Facilities and Infrastructure Constraints</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The issue of facilities and infrastructure is a crucial problem. The Transportation Department has only one tow truck. Ideally, there should be a minimum of 4 tow trucks to support parking crackdowns, especially if enforcement is carried out on each road segment. Relying on only one tow truck could lead to traffic congestion. The infrastructure provided by the Government and the Traditional Village authorities is suitable for motorcycles but insufficient for cars. There is a need for adequate car parking, especially in the tourism center (Puri Ubud). The current policy of parking in the Ubud field is not suitable, especially during the dry season when dust becomes an issue. Conversely, during the rainy season, the parking field turns into mud, reducing the appeal of Ubud tourism.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Human Resource Constraints</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">In the implementation of parking enforcement, there are several related resources, such as the Transportation Department, the Police, the Public Order Agency (Sat Pol-PP), and the Pecalang (traditional Balinese security). The constraint mentioned is that the Transportation Department and the Police lack personnel to carry out the crackdown on illegal parking. Currently, there are only two shifts available in the field, from 08:00 to 14:00 in the afternoon and from 14:00 to 22:00 in the evening. For optimal results, an additional shift is needed because activities in the Ubud area continue 24 hours without stopping.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">CLOSING</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Conclusion</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Based on the research findings and discussions on the implementation of policies regarding traffic management, transportation, and parking in the Ubud sub-district, it can be concluded that:</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">E-Journal of Cultural Studies</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">DOAJ Indexed (Since 14 Sep 2015)</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">ISSN 2338-2449 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The implementation of policies regarding traffic management, transportation, and parking in Ubud sub-district has not been optimal. This is indicated by the results of the analysis based on the policy implementation theory proposed by Merilee S. Grindle, which has not been well-executed. The content of the policy and the implementation context aimed at realizing an integrated transportation system that ensures safety, order, smoothness, regularity, sustainability, environmental preservation, spatial planning, and the development of knowledge and technology throughout Ubud sub-district and its surroundings have not been effectively carried out, considering the aspects of public interest, road users, and community, sustainability, environment, spatial planning, and the advancement of knowledge and technology.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The obstacles in implementing policies regarding management and engineering of traffic and road transportation as well as parking in the Ubud sub-district, including: a Facilities and Infrastructure constraints include the lack of parking spaces to accommodate the vehicles of residents, tourists and tourism workers. Then, there is a lack of public transportation facilities that reach certain areas to encourage people to use public transportation modes and tow trucks and trucks to transport vehicles that violate.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">b Human resource constraints, namely the lack of police officers, especially in the traffic department, and the number of transportation service officers who can speak foreign languages.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Suggestions</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Based on the discussion and conclusions, the researcher can provide the following recommendations.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;For the Gianyar Regency Government</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">It is advisable for the Gianyar Regency Government to provide parking facilities or collaborate with traditional village authorities to allocate parking spaces. Additionally, the government should ensure the availability of reliable and timely public transportation to encourage residents, workers, and tourists to switch from private vehicles to public transportation when visiting the Ubud area.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;For the people of Ubud</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The people of Ubud should have adequate parking facilities for their vehicles and</span></p>
<p><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font0">avoid parking in unauthorized areas or in front of houses. If there is no available space, it is advisable to rent parking spaces for individual vehicles.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;For the next researcher</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">The next researcher is expected to reexamine traffic management, transportation, and parking by conducting research in other areas, especially in tourist destinations, by expanding the research locations and increasing the number of informants. This study is limited to qualitative methods conducted only in the Gianyar area.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">REFERENCES</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Books</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Bob Foster dan Iwan Sidhrta., 2019, Dasar-Dasar Manajemen cetakan 1. Yogjakarta: Diandra Kreatif.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Farid Wadjdi &amp;&nbsp;Andryan 2022. Hukum dan Kebijakan Publik. Jakarta Timur: Sinar Grafika Offset</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">H.Jamaluddin Ahmad. Metode Penelitian Administrasi Publik Teori &amp;&nbsp;Aplikasi, Yogyakarta: Gava Media</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Hakim,EM.Lukman, 2011. Pengantar Administrasi Pembangunan, Edisi pertama. Jogjakarta: Ar-Ruzz Media.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Hasibun,Malayu S.P,Haji. 2015. Manajemen Dasar Pengertian Dan Masalah, Edisi Kesebelas. Jakarta:PT Bumi Aksara.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Kaelan, H.2012. Metode Penelitian Kualitatif Interdisipliner. Edisi Pertama:Yogjakarta: Paradikma</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Leo Agustino, 2022. Dasar-dasar Kebijakan Publik. Bandung: Cv Alfabeta Bandung</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">M.Djaya Bakri, 2016. Transportasi Multimoda Sebuah Pemodelan Kebutuhan Transportasi Multimoda. Malang: Intimedia Kelompok Intrabs Publishing</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Mulyadi, Dedy. 2015. Studi Kebijakan Publik dan Pelayanan Publik, Cetakan Kesatu:Bandung. Alfabeta,Cv</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Putranto, Suryo Leksmono. 2016. Rekayasa Lalu Lintas Edisi Ketiga, Edisi Pertama.Jakara : PT. Indeks.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Ridhotullah Subeki, Jauhar Muhammad. 2015. Pengantar Manajemen, Edisi pertama.Jakarta:Prestasi Pustaka Jakarta</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Tahir, Arifin.2020. Administrasi Publik (Good Governance Menuju Sound Government).</span></p>
<p><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/"><span class="font0" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/ecs/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font0">Cetakan Kesatu:Bandung: Penerbit Alfabeta.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Wahab, Solichin Abdul, 2017. Analisis Kebijakan. Cetakan keenam.Jakarta : PT Bumi Aksara,</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Winarno, Budi. 2012. Kebijakan Publik (Teori Proses Dan Studi Kasus),Cetakan Pertama:Yogjakarta:CAPS</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Wirata Gede,2022. KebijakanPemerintah Untuk Peningkatan Kesejahteraan Masyarakat Dan Pengentaan Kemiskinan. Cetakan 1. Jawa Tengah: CV Pena Persada.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Journals</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Desember 2015, Jurnal Penelitian Transportasi Darat, Volume 17 : 236.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Desember 2021, Jurnal Ilmiah Ilmu administrasi Negara , Voleme 8 Nomer 3,:377</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Hasnawati. 2020, Kebijakan Pengembangan Pariwisata Di Kawasan Malino Kabupaten Goa. Ilmu Administrasi Negara. Universitas Makassar.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Kurniawan, Alfi.2022. Implementasi Peraturan Bupati Asahan No 67 Tahun 2018 Dalam Rangka Meningkatkan Ketertiban Lalu Lintas Di Kawasan Kota Kisaran. Ilmu Administrasi Negara, Universitas Muhammadiyah Sumatra Utara.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Siswanto,Toton. 2019, Implementasi Kebijakan Penanggulangan Kemacetan Di Kota Bandung (Studi Kasus di Dinas Perhubungan Kota Bandung), Ilmu Administrasi Publik. Universitas. Universitas Islam Negeri Sunan Gunung Djati.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Yori, Alifio Randi. 2018. Implementasi Peraturan Gubernur DKI Jakarta No 164 Tentang Pembatasan Lalu Lintas Ganjil-genap Di Provinsi Jakarta. Ilmu Administrasi Publik, Universitas Sultan Ageng Tirtayasa.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Regulations</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Peraturan Bupati Gianyar Nomor 57 Tahun 2018 Tentang Manajemen dan Rekayasa Lalu Lintas Dan Angkutan Jalan Serta Perparkiran Di Kawasan Pariwisata Ubud</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">77</span></p>