---
layout: full_article
title: "Deixis Used in Shang Chi and The Legend of The Ten Rings Movie Script"
author: "Ni Kadek Dinda Pratiwi, Ni Luh Sutjiati Beratha, Ni Wayan Sukarini"
categories: stilistika
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/stilistika/full-85775 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/stilistika/id-85775"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/stilistika/full-85775"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;">STILISTIKA</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">Journal of Indonesian Language and Literature</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">ISSN: 2528-4940</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">Vol. 02, No.02: April 2023, pp-37-43</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font7" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>DEIXIS USED IN </span><span class="font7" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">SHANG CHI AND THE LEGEND OF THE TEN RINGS</span><span class="font7" style="font-weight:bold;"> MOVIE SCRIPT</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Ni Kadek Dinda Pratiwi<sup>1</sup></span><span class="font2"><sup>*</sup></span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">, </span><span class="font6" style="font-weight:bold;">Ni Luh Sutjiati Beratha</span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><sup>2</sup>, dan </span><span class="font6" style="font-weight:bold;">Ni Wayan Sukarini </span><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><sup>3 </sup></span><span class="font2">Universitas Udayana</span></p>
<p><span class="font2"><sup>*)</sup> surel korespondensi:</span><a href="mailto:dindapratiwii07@gmail.com"><span class="font2"> </span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">dindapratiwii07@gmail.com</span></a><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;"> </span><span class="font2">doi:</span><a href="https://doi.org/10.24843/STIL.2023.v02.i02.p04"><span class="font2"> </span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://doi.org/10.24843/STIL.2023.v02.i02.p04</span></a><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;"> </span><span class="font2">Artikel dikirim: 22 April 2022; diterima: 22 Mei 2022</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">DEIXIS USED IN </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">SHANG CHI AND THE LEGEND OF THE TEN RINGS</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"> MOVIE SCRIPT</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstract. </span><span class="font2">This study is aimed to find out the types of deixis and analysis the function of deixis. Data were taken from </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Shang Chi and the Legend of the Ten Rings</span><span class="font2"> Movie Script. The theory that was applied in this study was proposed by Levinson. Documentation method and note-taking technique used in collecting the data. The collected data was analysed by using a descriptive qualitative method. Meanwhile, in presenting the data analysis, this study used an informal method. The result shows that all the types of deixis and its function based on the theory by Levinson are found in the data source.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Keywords: deixis, types, function, movie script</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>INTRODUCTION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">Language is the most important aspect of the life of all beings, as it can be used to communicate with each other. Communicating with other people enables them to easily transfer and also receive information. Language is very important in the life of this world. Here, context is important for the listener to understand what the speaker means. Without context, it is difficult to clearly understand the meaning of the speaker. If the hearer knows the context, the language can be understood clearly about what the meaning is. In this case, the study of contextual meaning is called pragmatics.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">According to Wolfram Bublitz (2011:4) pragmatics describes the connection between the structure and application components of language and relates them at the same time. In other words, pragmatic studies are concerned with describing a speaker's utterances instead of the definition of words or sentences. According to Levinson (1983:3), Pragmatics is the study of the grammatical or structurally encoded relationship between language and context. Pragmatics includes several subfields and one of them is deixis. Deixis is personally focused on the interaction between language structures and the context in which they are use. Yule (2017:367) states, Deixis is a Greek technical term that describes one of the most basic aspects we do with utterance. It comprises pointing using language.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Deixis can be found in everyday life, it can be from film/movie, newspaper, song lyrics, magazines, or even from the internet. Movie script related to the usage of deixis in it. Movie is an audio-visual communication medium used to present a message to a group of people who have arranged in a certain place. This is because the dialogue, the gestures of the actors, and the gist of the message in the film appear more clearly to the eye of the viewer.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Levinson (1983) says that deixis is pointing through language, using deictic expressions. He divides deixis into five parts: personal deixis, place deixis, time deixis, social deixis, and discourse deixis. First, personal deixis is a form used to designate people (I, you). Second, place deixis is the form used to indicate location (here, 3 there). Third, time deixis is the form used to designate a location in time (now, then), social deixis is a deixis expression used to distinguish social status and discourse deixis.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Deixis can help people to interpret the meaning of a certain sentence based on its context. There are many words which indicate kinds of deixis and any form of linguistics that having a function to pointing is called deictic expression. We can also see how the usage of deixis in a particular field as what is portrayed in the movie script and this study will help the reader to understand deixis better.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>RESULT AND DISCUSSION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">This part presents results and discussions of the data from </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">SHANG CHI AND THE LEGEND OF THE TEN RINGS</span><span class="font3"> movie Script which has been analyzed using theory proposed by Levinson.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Person Deixis</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">First person singular</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Data 1</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Shaun: “After my mom died… My dad started my training. From sunup to sundown, I was taught every possible way to kill a man. By the time I was 14, I could barely remember what life was like before she died. That’s how old I was when he sent me on my very first assignment. I was willing to do anything he wanted. If he asked me to burn the world down, I would’ve asked him”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">According to Levinson, it is categorized as person deixis because it is directly involved in the discourse marked by the first-person pronoun ‘I’. The word ‘I’ and ‘my’ in the data above can be categorized as anaphoric deictic because the information</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">about the entity have been mentioned earlier.it can be identified by looking at the previous discourse below:</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">“Fine. You can explain on the plane. What? No, Katty, you just can… You can explain on the plane, Shaun”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">According to Levinson, ‘My’ is identified as a deictic expression that belongs to first person deixis because it concerns the grammatical person involved in this sentence I and the word “I” is a subject in a sentence as the one who did an action.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>First Person Plural</span><br><br><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark8"></a>Data 2</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">Shaun: “Look, it happens to these things, we’re gonna be jobless and in debt for the rest of our lives”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The sentence above explained about Shaun who told Katty that she had to be careful driving this luxury car because the car was not theirs. There is a possessive determiner of ‘our’ the sentence. It is the possessive form of pronoun we. The information about the deictic expression ‘our’ will be described by the following discourse:</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Katty: “I’m Driving”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Shaun: “No, you’re not.Katty. Hey, hey, hey, get back here. Give me the key. Please open the door”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The sentence above is said by Shaun when he was talking to Katty. The word ‘our’ is a possessive adjective, and the function is to show possession of something that in this case belongs to Shaun and Katty.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark9"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark10"></a>Second Person</span><br><br><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>Data 3</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">Katty: “Shaun. Hey. You need to tell me what the hell’s going on. What are you doing? Where are you going?”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">According to Levinson, the word “you” in the sentence is a subject pronoun that belongs to the second person pronoun. This deictic expression also called as anaphora because the information about entity has been mentioned in the previous text. The function of the word you in the sentence above is the word that referred to the addressee as the listener it received the messages.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Third Person</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Third Person Singular</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Data 4</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Shaun: “By the time I was 14, I could barely remember what life was like before she died. That's how old I was when he sent me on my first assignment”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The word ‘he’ refers to someone not identified as the speaker or the addressee and it was mentioned anaphorically in previous discourse:</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Shaun: “After my mom died. My dad started my training. From sunup to sundown, I was taught every possible way to kill a man”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Based on the discourse above, Shaun was talking about how his father changed after his mother died. It can be seen that the word ‘he’ directly refers to Shaun’s father</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>Third Person Plural</span><br><br><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark14"></a>Data 5</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">Shaun: “They took my pendant. They’re gonna come for yours next”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The word ‘they’ is the plural third pronoun deixis. The information about ‘they’ is mentioned in the following statement above:</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Shaun: “My sister sent me this a few months ago. I think it’s the address of where she’s staying. Those guys back there were sent by my dad”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Based on the following statement above, Shaun was trying to tell her that the word ‘they’ mentioned above refers to the guys who were sent by his dad. The word ‘they’ was a deictic expression because it pointed to people that did not exist in the speech event. The function of the word they is used to refer to the subject of a clause.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark15"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark16"></a>2</span><span class="font3">.</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Place Deixis</span><br><br><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark17"></a>Data 6</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Shaun: “I’m not here to fight anybody. Okay? I’m looking for my sister, Xu Xialing”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">A locative adverb of here is found in the sentence refers to a certain place near the speaker. This shows that t is a deictic expression because it relates to the specification of location in space about the speaker at that moment. Therefore, this deictic expression can be identified as anaphoric deixis.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">“Welcome to the Golden Daggers Club. Okay, let’s get you ready to fight.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">By looking at the previous text, it can be identified that the word here refers to a specific place which is Golden Daggers Club where is the place he is coming to now.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The word here functions as a locative adverb which shows where the utterance takes place when it is uttered.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark18"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark19"></a>3</span><span class="font3">. &nbsp;</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Time Deixis</span><br><br><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark20"></a>Data 7</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Ying Nan: “Tonight, we honor those who gave their lives so we might see another day. They were more than warriors. They were our mother’s and father’s, our sisters and brothers. and though we will always hold on to their memories. Tonight we release them to rest with our ancestors.”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">There are deictic expressions “tonight” found in the sentence. According to Levinson, the deictic expression tonight belongs to temporal deixis. She said that tonight is the day when there has been a war between our family and our ancestors. The word tonight has functioned as temporal deixis which concerns the various times involved in and referred to in an utterance.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark21"></a><span class="font3"><a name="bookmark22"></a>4.</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Social Deixis</span><br><br><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark23"></a>Data 8</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Katty: “Hello Sir. Welcome to the Fairmont”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This utterance was actually spoken by Katty. It was categorized as social deixis because it is a kind of expression used to categorize some people based on their social situations. The honorific title ‘sir’ in the sentence belongs to an absolute social deixis. In this case, it refers to a man. Based on the sentences above, the function of social deixis used to show the position of the partcipants on the level social status. It was categorized as Speech level which this term is used to refer plain, polite, and humble speech in most of languages used by East Asian.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark24"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark25"></a>5</span><span class="font3">.</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Discourse Deixis</span><br><br><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark26"></a>Data 9</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">Mrs. Chen: “Shaun, did my daughter apply to any new jobs this week?”</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The sentence above was spoken by Mrs. Chen who is asking Shaun about his daughter. The word “this” categorized as discourse deixis is a type of deixis that deals with certain parts in the linguistic form that refer to a particular discourse. The function of the word ‘this’ refers to an upcoming portion of the discourse, it is “week”.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark27"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark28"></a>CONCLUSION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">From the analysis of the data it can be concluded that in the </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">SHANG CHI AND THE LEGEND OF THE TEN RINGS</span><span class="font3"> Movie Script There are 9 data contains five types of deixis using Levinson Theory such as person deixis, place deixis, time deixis, social deixis and discourse deixis.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">From the types of deixis, they have their own function usch as person deixis used to indicate the pronoun such as pronoun I, you, she, or he. Time deixis indicates both times coinciding with the speaker’s utterance and the time the speaker’s voice is heard. Place deixis is used to refers a location relative to the location of a participant in the speech event, typically the speaker, the function of social deixis is related to the social environment between speakers and speech partners or writers with readers. It is influenced by differences in society, such as a person’s social status, class, and social group. And last discourse deixis is used to a portion of a discourse relative to the speaker's current “location” in the discourse.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark29"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark30"></a>REFERENCES</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">Artika, Putri. 2018. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">The Analysis of Deixis in The Novel The Fault in Our Stars by John Green</span><span class="font3">. Jurnal Humanis, Fakultas Ilmu Budaya Unud. Vol. 22.3.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Astria, Asri. 2019. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">The Realization of Deixis In Students Writing at Sekolah Tinggi Keguruan dan Ilmu Pendidikan Muhammadiyah Pringsewu Lampung</span><span class="font3">. Universitas Negeri Semarang.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Cruise, A. 2000. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">A Glossary of Semantics and Pragmatics.</span><span class="font3"> Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Dinia Ningsih, Putri. 2022. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Deictic Expressions Used by Lera Boroditsky in TED Talks Channel.</span><span class="font3"> REILA: Journal of Research and Innovation in Language Vol. 4 No. 1.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Herman. 2020. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Deixis Analysis in the Business Article of the Jakarta Post</span><span class="font3">. Wanastra : Jurnal Bahasa dan Sastra. Volume 12.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Kusumaningrum, 2016. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Deixis Analysis on Indonesian Shakespeare’s Comics Strip of Julius Caesar.</span><span class="font3"> Transformatika, Vol. 12 , No. 2, Pp. 73-82</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Kholis, N. 2016. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Deixis Analysis of the Good Dinosaur the Movie</span><span class="font3">. Register Journal. Vol 9, No 1.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Lestyanada, Delia. 2021. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Deixis Analysis In the Short Story The Little Old Woman Who Lived in a Shoe</span><span class="font3"> by Joseph Martin Kronheim. EJI Vol. 5 No. 1.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Levinson, S. C., 1983. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Pragmatics. 1st ed. Cambridge</span><span class="font3">: Cambridge University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Pranata, Sofyan Adi. 2020. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Deixis In Jakarta Post Article.</span><span class="font3"> Universitas Nurul Jadid. IJOEEL Vol. 02 No. 01.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Ramasari, Maria 2020. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">An Analysis of Deixis Existed on Articles at Jakarta Post</span><span class="font3">. Journal of Language and Literature Volume 8 No. 2.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Rosmawaty. 2013. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Analysis the Use of the Kind of Deixis on ‘Ayat-Ayat Cinta’ Novel by Habiburrahman El-Shirazy</span><span class="font3">. International Journal of Humanities and Social Science, Vol. 3, No.17, Pp. 57-66.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Samosir, Nita. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">An Analysis of Deixis in The article of The Jakarta Post</span><span class="font3">. University of Medan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Setiakawanti, Susanti. 2018. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Analysis Pragmatic Study On Deixis In The Articles Jakarta Sport</span><span class="font3">. Project: Professional Journal of English Education. Vol. 1 No. 6</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Sukmayanti, K. N. 2013. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Deixis in The Novel “The Rainbow Troops”.</span><span class="font3"> Humanis. Vol. 5, No. 1, Pp.1-11.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Wardhaugh, Ronald. 1972. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Introduction to Linguistics.</span><span class="font3"> New York: McGraw-Hill.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Yan Huang. 2007. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Pragmatics</span><span class="font3">. New York: Oxford University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Yule, G. 1996. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Pragmatics. 1st ed</span><span class="font3">. Oxford: Oxford University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Yule, G. 2017. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">The Study of Language. 6 th ed.</span><span class="font3"> Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Zaini M. Miftah. 2016. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Analysis of deixis in the article selected from the jakarta post.</span><span class="font3"> Central Kalimantan Indonesia : IAIN Palangka Raya.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark31"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark32"></a>AUTHOR PROFILE</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Ni Kadek Dinda Pratiwi </span><span class="font3">is a student of the English Literature Program at Udayana University batch 2018. In 2018, she participated in a committee organized by faculties and study programs.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Prof. Dr. Ni Luh Sutjiati Beratha, M.A</span><span class="font3">. is a professor in Semantics at the English Department Faculty of Arts Udayana University was graduated from Australian universities. She was completed her master program at the Department of Linguistics, Monash University Melbourne Australia in 1989, and Ph.D degree was gained from the Australian National University (ANU) Canberra Australia in 1992. She was the Dean of the Faculty of Arts Udayana University from 2015 until 2019.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Dr</span><span class="font3">. </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Ni Wayan Sukarini, M.Hum. </span><span class="font3">is a lecturer at English Department, Faculty of Arts, Udayana University. She finishes the years of study from undergraduate until post graduate at the same institution where she works. she studies linguistics and her majors are semantics and semiotics. Some researches have been done individually and in team</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">43</span></p>