---
layout: full_article
title: "A Comparative Study of Indonesian and Japanese Classifiers"
author: "Sandra Astariani"
categories: linguistika
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/full-98102 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/id-98102"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/linguistika/full-98102"  
comments: true
---

<p><a href="https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/linguistika/"><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/linguistika/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">DOI:</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"> </span><a href="https://doi.org/10.24843/ling.2023.v30.i02.p05"><span class="font1">https://doi.org/10.24843/ling.2023.v30.i02.p05</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">LINGUISTIKA, SEPTEMBER 2023</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">p-ISSN: 0854-9613 e-ISSN: 2656-6419</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 30 No.2</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>A Comparative Study of Indonesian and Japanese Classifiers</span></h1>
<p><span class="font4">Putu Sandra Putri Astariani</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">(D4 Manajemen Bisnis Internasional, Politeknik Negeri Bali, Indonesia) e-mail:</span><a href="mailto:sandraputri88@pnb.ac.id"><span class="font4"> </span><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">sandraputri88@pnb.ac.id</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstract--</span><span class="font4">Classifiers belong to open class noun. All languages are naturally occupied with classifiers, yet the usage is various depending on how the language treats them. Japanese language, as an obligatory-classifier language, makes the classifiers compulsory, in contrast with an optional-classifier language, Indonesian language. Despite this, Japanese and Indonesian languages treat the classifiers syntactically and semantically similar. This article aims at revealing, both the semantic and syntactic differences and similarities between Japanese and Indonesian classifiers. The analysis shows that in terms of structure, Japanese and Indonesian classifiers are similar; however, each language demonstrates difference in classifier use. Japanese language has nineteen frequently used classifiers including two types which can replace others. They can change their form by fusing with its numeral adjective as in </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">hitori (ichi-nin), ippiki (ichi-hiki),</span><span class="font4"> without affecting the whole meaning of the noun phrase</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">.</span><span class="font4"> Indonesian classifiers cover of twenty-two optional types. Classifiers are often omitted in spoken form to avoid formality and some of them can also change their form by adding </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">se-</span><span class="font4"> prior to the numeral adjective to indicate “one object” as in </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">sebatang rokok</span><span class="font4">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Keywords—</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">classifiers, numerals, comparative</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstrak--</span><span class="font4">Kata bantu bilangan termasuk ke dalam kata benda bersifat terbuka. Semua bahasa pada dasarnya dilengkapi oleh kata bantu bilangan, namun penggunaannya tergantung dari cara suatu bahasa “memperlakukan” mereka. Bahasa Jepang, sebagai bahasa yang mewajibkan kehadiran kata bantu bilangan, kerap menggunakannya dalam kalimat dan ujaran. Berbeda dengan bahasa Indonesia yang tidak mewajibkan kata bantu bilangan dalam kalimat dan ujaran. Terlepas dari perbedaan karakter yang ada, bahasa Jepang dan bahasa Indonesia memperlakukan kata bantu bilangan dengan cara yang hampir sama secara sintaksis dan semantis. Artikel ini bertujuan untuk mengungkap perbedaan dan persamaan sintaksis dan semantis antara kata bantu bilangan bahasa Jepang dan bahasa Indonesia. Analisis menunjukkan bahwa dalam hal struktur, kata bantu bilangan bahasa Jepang dan bahasa Indonesia mirip; meski demikian, masing-masing bahasa menunjukkan perbedaan dalam penggunaan kata bantu bilangan. Bahasa Jepang memiliki 19 kata bantu bilangan yang sering digunakan, dua diantaranya dapat saling menggantikan. Kata tersebut dapat mengubah bentuknya dengan menyatu dengan ajektiva numeral seperti pada </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">hitori (ichi-nin), ippiki (ichi-hiki),</span><span class="font4"> tanpa memengaruhi makna keseluruhan frasa nomina</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">.</span><span class="font4"> Terdapat 22 kata bantu bilangan dalam bahasa Indonesia, dan semuanya bersifat opsional. Dalam percakapan, kata bantu bilangan sering dihilangkan unutk menghindari keformalan, beberapa kata bantu bilangan juga mengubah bentuk dan menyatu dengan nomina dengan menambah </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">se-</span><span class="font4"> sebelum ajektiva numeral untuk menyatakan “satu buah objek” seperti pada frasa </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">sebatang rokok</span><span class="font4">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Kata Kunci</span><span class="font4">—</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">kata bantu bilangan, numeral, komparatif</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 30 No.2</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Introduction</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">There has been an endless question on how to measure certain thing right, and a classifier is the answer for this. However, a new problem arises since classifiers can sometimes be baffling because not all languages are naturally “blessed” with closed class of classifiers. Japanese language is an obligatory classifier language (Sudo, 2016:1). Numerals cannot modify noun or noun phrase in Japanese resulting in diversity in classifiers. Classifiers in Japanese have several roles i.e., modifying noun or noun phrases and verbs or adjectives, as in construction:</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ni hiki wo kau </span><span class="font4">two Cl particle raise (Bender and Siegel, 2005)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The classifiers </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">(hiki)</span><span class="font4"> and numeral adjectives </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">(ni) </span><span class="font4">modify the verb </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">(kau)</span><span class="font4">. Further example is presented in the following construction, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">sannin &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;mo &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;ii desu,</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">two people (Cl) particle good</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">this construction has the adjective (</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ii</span><span class="font4">) modified by the classifier phrase (</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">futari</span><span class="font4">). Based on the examples, however, it is unacceptable to say (noun) </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ni o kau</span><span class="font4"> or </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">san mo ii desu.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">As a part of South East Asian region and Austronesian language, Indonesian language comes in different nature where classifiers are an open class type and is more optional to use either in constructions, phrases, utterances, or sentences. For instance, the noun phrase </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">tiga bebek</span><span class="font4"> (three ducks) has exactly the same meaning as </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">tiga ekor bebek.</span><span class="font4"> Therefore, the speakers have more freedom in choosing whether or not they will use the classifiers. Nevertheless, situation sometimes hold important role is the presence of classifiers some native speakers find classifiers too formal to be used when speaking. This results in minimum insight regarding the use of classifiers and unfortunately, classifiers seem to be obsolete due to this kind of nature.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Japanese and Indonesian classifiers may present difference in use, some similarities are still found, nonetheless. The notion of semantic classifiers is sometimes confusing since many speakers still find it hard to use it in communication. Therefore, this article focuses on three problems, i.e., what are the common classifiers used in Japanese and Indonesian language and how are they used in sentences? The second problem the continues on what are the function lies within classifiers in both language? The last problem arises due to the question what are the similarities and differences of the Japanese and Indonesian classifiers?</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">The problems lead to comparison between both languages’ classifiers and result in findings related the nature of classifiers in phrases and constructions; how they are similar and different to one another in terms meaning, structure, and function. Furthermore, this issue becomes interesting since there are some classifiers used and having similar meaning in both Indonesian and Japanese language. By paying attention to Japanese as a rich-in-classifiers language and Indonesian as the optional one, this research tries to compare and discuss classifiers through the syntax and semantic point of view.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Research Method</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Data were collected by using documentation method along with note taking technique. The documentation method focuses on language use either spoken or written. Alanshari (2022:203) argues that this method is a way of obtaining data by paying attention to the existing event. The analysis was carried out descriptively by using a distributional method, meaning that the language is analyzed by using the determinants, in this case the cohesive devices, found within it. To support this method, the expansion technique (</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Teknik perluasan</span><span class="font4">) is used to analyse the unit of speech and to reveal the significance of a language, in this case the classifiers and its construction. The results are presented by combining formal and informal method; descriptively presenting</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 30 No.2</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">description by using words with the presence of tables. Analysis is presented based on the theory of Cohesive Devices and the Functional Grammar proposed by Halliday and Hasan.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">There has been a number of researchers giving notions regarding classifiers and turning them as study object. Lock (in Aziz, 2009:1) defines classifiers as words which subclassify the thing. Classifiers identify a subclass which the thing either is or is not a member of. Lehrer (1985:1) stated that classifier is constructions which include partitives, pseudo-partitives, and measure phrases. Allan (in Lehrer, 2016:111) lists seven categories of classifiers as follows: (1) Unit counters: a piece of equipment, two head of cattle. (2) Fractional classifiers: three quarters of the cake. (3) Number set classifiers: many hundreds of people, dozens of birds. (4) Collective classifiers: Two clumps of grass, a herd of animals. (5) Varietal classifiers: two species of wheat, all kinds of flowers. (6) Measure classifiers: two pounds of cabbage, one liter of wine, a box of candy, a bowl of sugar. (7) Arrangement classifiers: Two rows of beans, three stacks of books. In addition to these, Jelinek (in Lehrer, 1986:111) pointed out another idea of classifiers called metaphorical comparison classifiers which compare things metaphorically, such as a bear of a man, a slip of a girl, and a dream of a house. Other types of classifiers proposed by Croft (2015:4) are shown as follows:</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Classifier Type</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Semantic/ Pragmatic Function</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Noun Class</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">Determination (Reference)</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Numeral Classifier</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">Enumeration</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Possessive Classifier</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">Possession</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Predicate Classifier</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">Spatial Predication</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font4">Syntactically, classifiers are constructed by (Det1) N of (Det2) N. A more complex structure, however, has been previously explained where classifiers consist of partitives, pseudo-partitives, and measure phrases. Partitives contain a</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">determiner between of and the following noun phrase (NP) as can be seen in these examples where her and that are the partitives, i.e., a number of her objections and three pounds of that meat. Pseudo-partitives, in contrast, have no determiner between the of and the following NP, e.g., a bunch of flowers and a selection of commentaries. The last element, measure phrases is constructed by quantifier or quantifier-like nouns as in many objections and a number of objections. In spite of this structure, noun phrases with classifiers are mainly constructed by numeral adjectives, classifiers, and nouns.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Semantically, classifiers influence the meaning of a noun phrase, for instance a piece of wood, a flock of birds, and a head of lettuce. These noun phrase, are constructed by piece, flock, and head as the classifiers and wood, birds, and lettuce as the head of the noun phrase. As heads, those words still have their literal meaning. However, the presence of classifiers gives more specific meaning to the heads. The classifier piece, according to Oxford online dictionary, means an amount of something that has been cut or separated from the rest of it, if it is combined with wood it refers to the part of the wood (small part of wood) that has been taken from the whole wood. The same case happens in the second noun phrase where flock refers to a group of sheep, goats or birds of the same type. Its combination with birds will mean a group of bird with the same type. The last classifier, head is rarely encountered and shows a tendency to be a noun that modifies another noun. Yet it is a classifier to state that something is round (having similar shape to a head). In addition to these, there are other classifiers semantically contributing to meaning of the phrase, for instance bottle and cup (referring to the thing’s container) as in a bottle of water and a cup of tea; stack and pile (referring to the way something is arranged) as in a stack of book and a pile of paper; and day and month (referring to the periods of time) as in one day and six months.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">This short description about classifiers has finally led to the notion of semantic classifier. This</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 30 No.2</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">concept basically means words (mostly nouns) which give or complete the meaning of another noun by modifying it within a noun phrase. In this case, the classifier acts as a modifier whereas the noun is the head of the phrase.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Results and Discussion</span><br><br><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark8"></a>3.1 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Results</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Japanese and Indonesian classifiers demonstrate different behavior when it comes to usage (both in sentence and utterance). The former requires classifiers in either sentences or utterances; the latter, however, does not. Syntactically, Japanese classifiers form two different patterns whenever combined with numeral adjective, i.e.,</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark9"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark10"></a>N</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">1 </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">+ particle + numeral adjective + Cl</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">This pattern is possible in as in </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Bensu (N1) o (particle) kyuu (numeral adjective) dai (Cl).</span><span class="font4"> In this construction, the numeral adjective and classifier modify the noun, i.e., </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Bensu</span><span class="font4">. Another role is showed another possible pattern can such as:</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark11"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark12"></a>Numeral adjective + Cl</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">This pattern is used in the construction </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">hitori</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"> (N</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">1 </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">+ Cl) </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">(ichi-nin) </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">wa kowai kara iyadayo! </span><span class="font4">it is interesting to notice that in the second pattern, classifier turn a numeral adjective to modify the adjective i.e., </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">kowai</span><span class="font4">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Indonesian language presents different structure with the following pattern,</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark13"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark14"></a>Numeral adjective + Cl+ N</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">1</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Ismail tetap tidak punya apa-apa kecuali </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">tiga kerat roti.</span><span class="font4"> The bold typed phrase consists of a numeral adjective (</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">tiga</span><span class="font4">), a classifier </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">(kerat</span><span class="font4">), and a noun </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">(roti).</span><span class="font4"> In Indonesian language, it is still acceptable to inverse the phrase into </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">roti tiga kerat</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">, </span><span class="font4">to follow the following pattern:</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">N</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">1 </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">+ Numeral adjective + Cl</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Another characteristic spotted in Indonesian language is that it is also possible to dismiss the classifiers to avoid formality, therefore it is very common to meet this phrase, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">tiga roti</span><span class="font4"> yet the meaning remains the same as in </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">tiga kerat roti. </span><span class="font4">Japanese language, in contrast, is unable to directly use a numeral adjective and noun altogether due to the characteristic of the numeral; it cannot directly modify a noun. Thus, in the phrase </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ichirin no hana </span><span class="font4">consisting of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ichi</span><span class="font4"> (numeral adjective), </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">rin</span><span class="font4"> (a classifier), </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">no</span><span class="font4"> (particle), and </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">hana</span><span class="font4"> (noun), </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">rin</span><span class="font4"> is obligatory since the word </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ichi</span><span class="font4"> cannot directly modify </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">hana.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark15"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark16"></a>3.2 . Discussion</span></h2></li></ul>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">4.1. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Japanese Classifiers</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Japanese language is well-known as an obligatory-classifier language. According to Sudo (2016:1) what makes Japanese an obligatory classifier language is not the semantics of nouns but the semantics of numerals. Specifically, evidence is presented that numerals in Japanese cannot function as predicates on their own, which is taken as evidence that the extensions of numerals in Japanese are exclusively singular terms. In other words, classifier is required for the numerals to modify a noun phrase, for example:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">(1) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;ichi*(-rin)-no-hana one-cl-gen-flower ‘one flower’</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">(Sudo, 2006:2)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">This phrase is constructed by the numeral adjective (</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ichi</span><span class="font4">), classifier (</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">rin</span><span class="font4">), particle (</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">no</span><span class="font4">) and the noun (</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">hana</span><span class="font4">). </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Rin</span><span class="font4"> is a specific classifier to count flowers and it should accompany the occurrence of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ichi </span><span class="font4">since </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ichi</span><span class="font4"> cannot directly modify the noun </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">hana. </span><span class="font4">Therefore, it can be stated that </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ichi rin</span><span class="font4"> now can be the modifier of the noun (head of the noun phrase) </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">hana.</span><span class="font4"> Japanese language has 350 classifiers, or counters and are divided into several groups, i.e.,</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 30 No.2</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td colspan="2" style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Absolutely Must-Know Counters 2</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Must-Know Counters</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">17</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Common Counters</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">47</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Somewhat Common Counters</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">205</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Rare But Interesting Counters</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">22</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Gairaigo Counters</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">57</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font4">This article will only discuss the first two categories since those are the most frequently used classifiers in Japanese, especially the absolutely must-know counters because it can cover the role of other classifiers. The rest categories are used, yet they are not very common and frequent. The absolutely must-know counters and the must-know counters along with their function and use are presented in the following Table.</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">NO .</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">CLA SSIF IERS</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">THINGS</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">COUNTED</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">SENTENCE</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">EXAMPLE</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">1</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">~tsu </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">つ</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">General （to count anything in Japanese Language）</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Mikan </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">ga </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">mitsu arimasu</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">There are three</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">oranges</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">2</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">~ko</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">個</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">/</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">こ</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">Chinese version of ~</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">tsu,</span><span class="font4"> can be used to count anything with clear distinct boundary and shape</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Odeko ni nikibi ga san ko motekita</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">I got three pimples on my forehead</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">3</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">~hon </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">本 </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">（ </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">ほん</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">）</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">Long things or things with stick-shape, e.g. pencils, twigs, clindrical batteries, bottles, cans, etc</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Pen o ip</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">pon </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">kashitekuremas enka</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Could you lend me one of your pens?</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">4</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">~mai </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">枚 </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">（ </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">まい</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">）</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Flat things and clothes e.g. papers, t-shirts, cards, pants, etc</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">100 </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">mai </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">no origami ga hitsuyou desu </span><span class="font4">（I） need 100 pieces of origami paper</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">5</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">~hiki </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">匹 </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">（ </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">ひき</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">）</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">Small up to medium sized animal （or if you can pick the animals up）. In some cases, this counters can also be used to count monsters, and animal-like people.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Inu o ip</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">piki </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">to neko o ni </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">hiki </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">katteimasu </span><span class="font4">We have one dog and two cats.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">6</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">~tou </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">頭 </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">（ </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">とう</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">）</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">Large-sized animals or animals you cannot pick, e.g. cows, goats, livestocks, etc.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Kurisumasu ni santa kuroosu kara ushi wo hat</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">tou </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">moratta </span><span class="font4">Santa gave me eight cows on Christmas Day</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">7</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">~wa </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">羽 </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">（ </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">わ</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">）</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Birds, origami cranes. Yet in some cases, it can also count rabbits.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Niwa ni wa ni </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">wa </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">niwatori ga imasu </span><span class="font4">In the yard, there are two chickens.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">8</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">~sats u </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">冊 </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">（ </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">さつ</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">）</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Books</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Kouichi wa mainichi nana </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">satsu </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">no hon o yomimasu </span><span class="font4">Kouichi reads seven books every day.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">9</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">~dai </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">台 </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">（ </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">だい</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">）</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">Transportations, machines, instruments, something you can stand or put things on</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Ben wa Bensu o kyuu </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">dai </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">motteimasu </span><span class="font4">Ben owns nine Mercedes Benz cars.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">10</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">~fun </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">分 </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">（ </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">ふん</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">）</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Minute （time）</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Gomen! Ip</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">pun </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">chikoku shi sou!</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Sorry! I'll be a minute late!</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">11</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">~ka/n</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">Days or stating</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Raigetsu no</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 30 No.2</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ichi </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">日 </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">（ </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">か</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">/</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">に ち</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">）</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">certain day of the month</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">mik</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">ka</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">tte nani shiteru?</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">What are you up to on the third day of next month?</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">12</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">~nen </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">年 </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">（ </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">ねん</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">）</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Years and grade （in highschool, college, or university）</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Ima, daigaku ichi </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">nen</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">sei desu</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">I'm in the first year of university now</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">13</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">~kai </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">回 </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">（ </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">かい</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">）</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Frequency, chance of something happens</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Nihon ni wa nan</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">kai </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">itta koto ga arimasuka </span><span class="font4">How many times have you been to Japan?</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">14</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">~ri/ni</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">n</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">人 </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">（ </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">り</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">/</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">に ん</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">）</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Humans, people</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Hito</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">ri </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">wa kowai kara iyadayo!</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">I don't want to be alone because I'll be scared.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">15</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">~tsuk i/gats u </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">月 </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">（ </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">つき</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">/ </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">がつ</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">）</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Months</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Boku no tanjoubi wa ichi </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">gatsu </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">tsuitachi desu </span><span class="font4">My birthday is January the first</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">16</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">~ji </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">時 </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">（</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">じ</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">）</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">To state time, e.g.....o’clock</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">San-</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">ji </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">desu </span><span class="font4">It is three o'clock.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">17</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">~jika n </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">時間 </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">（</span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">じか ん</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">）</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Hour</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Ni </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">jikan </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">go ni aimashou!</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Let's meet up in two hours!</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">18</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">~kai </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">階 </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">（ </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">かい</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">）</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Building’s floors</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Watashi no heya wa juni</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">kai </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ni arimasu </span><span class="font4">My room is on</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">the twelfth floor</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">19 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">~sai</span><span class="font4"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;In general, it</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Kouichi no</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">歳 </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">（</span><span class="font4"> &nbsp;&nbsp;states the age of</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">obaachan tte</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">さ<sub>い</sub></span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">）</span><span class="font4"> humans and</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">animals</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ima nan</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">sai</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">? </span><span class="font4">How old is Koichi's grandma now?</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">Table 1. Japanese Classifiers and Their Function in Sentences</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">As shown in the Table, each noun has their own classifier. The first two classifiers are the absolutely must-know classifiers which can count almost anything in general. The other seventeen classifiers are the most encountered and used classifier for specific nouns. If a speaker does not know what classifier to use for certain noun, -</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">tsu </span><span class="font4">and –</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ko</span><span class="font4"> can replace those seventeen classifiers. Most of the classifiers are formed based on the things or noun they modify, for example the classifiers </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">nichi, gatsu,</span><span class="font4"> and </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">nen,</span><span class="font4"> used for counting days month, and year, which respectively mean </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">day, month,</span><span class="font4"> and </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">year.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">4.2. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Indonesian Classifiers</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">In contrary to Japanese language, Indonesian is not an obligatory classifier language. This is due to the nature of numeral adjective that can directly modify a noun, for instance </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">empat burung, lima kuda, sepuluh kendaraan,</span><span class="font4"> etc. Therefore, a noun phrase may have the same meaning whether or not the classifier is used. In several occasion, classifers are sometimes omitted to make the sentence more concise, natural, and casual. According to Chaer, as quoted by Cerianti （2011:45）, stated that </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">kata bantu bilangan adalah kata yang digunakan sebagai tanda pengenal benda dan digunakan dibelakang kata bilangan dalam menyebutkan jumlah suatu benda </span><span class="font4">（classifiers are the words used behind the numerals as a noun identifier in counting things）. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Tata Bahasa Baku Bahasa Indonesia</span><span class="font4"> divides classifiers into several types based on their functions which are presented as follows.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 30 No.2</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">N</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">O</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">CLASSI</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">FIERS</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">THINGS</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">COUNTED</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">SENTENCE</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">EXAMPLES</span></p></td><td colspan="3" style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">bracelets, or other things</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">bentuk </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">cincin, masing-masing</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">1</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Orang</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Humans</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Saudagar tersebut mempunyai dua </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">orang </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">anak laki-laki.</span></p>
<p><a href="http://digilib.stainponorogo.ac.id/gdl.php?mod=browse=read=stainpress-11111-mohamadabu-844=Siswa=english=english"><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">(</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">digilib.stainponoro</span></a><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;"> </span><a href="http://digilib.stainponorogo.ac.id/gdl.php?mod=browse=read=stainpress-11111-mohamadabu-844=Siswa=english=english"><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">go.ac.id</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">, </span></a><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">crawled on 10/02/2014) </span><span class="font4">That merchant has</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">that can be bent</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">beratnya 50 gram </span><a href="https://brainly.co.id/tugas/18397836"><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">(</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">https://brainly.co.i</span></a><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;"> </span><a href="https://brainly.co.id/tugas/18397836"><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">d/tugas/18397836</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">,</span></a><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;"> crawled on 18/06/2020) </span><span class="font4">Mom buys three rings, each weighing 50 grams.</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">two sons</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">6</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Bidang</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">Land, rice</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Nama Sumampouw</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">2</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Ekor</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Animals</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Hasilnya, delapan </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">ekor </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">anak jalak Bali.</span></p>
<p><a href="http://bookmark.dewaseo.co.id/tag/types+of+bathroom+countertops"><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">(</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">bookmark.dewaseo</span></a><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;"> </span><a href="http://bookmark.dewaseo.co.id/tag/types+of+bathroom+countertops"><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">.co.id</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">, </span></a><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">crawled on 08/02/2014)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">As the result, there are eight Jalak Bali chicks</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">fields, or other wide and flat things</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">sendiri tertera dalam kepemilikan sertifikat atas dua </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">bidang </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">tanah itu. </span><a href="http://harianmetro.co.id/index.php/tindakan-kriminal?start=130"><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">(</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">harianmetro.co.id</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">,</span></a><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;"> crawled on 04/02/2014) </span><span class="font4">The name of Sumampouw itself</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">3</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Buah</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Fruits or other things besides humans and</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Setiap sachet berisi tiga </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">buah </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">kondom. </span><a href="http://www.sumenepkab.go.id/?page=detailberita.html=191"><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">(</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">www.sumenepkab.</span></a><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;"> </span><a href="http://www.sumenepkab.go.id/?page=detailberita.html=191"><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">go.id</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">, </span></a><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">crawled on</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">is stated in that ownership certificate of both of those lands</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">animals</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">29/01/2014) </span><span class="font4">Every sachet contains three condoms</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">7</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Belah</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">Eyes, ears, or other things in pairs</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Kedua </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">belah </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">pihak mulai saling ancam.</span></p>
<p><a href="http://www.indopos.co.id/2012/11/buruh-dan-pengusaha-saling-ancam.html"><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">(</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">www.indopos.co.id</span></a></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">4</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Batang</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">Trees, cigarettes, other things with cylindrical</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Ketika melintasinya, saya melihat beberapa </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">batang </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">pohon yang tumbuh dari pohon</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">, crawled on 07/02/2014) </span><span class="font4">Both sides start threatening each other</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">shape</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">yang sudah ditebang.</span></p>
<p><a href="http://amitofo.wordpress.com/"><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">(</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">amitofo.wordpress</span></a><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;"> </span><a href="http://amitofo.wordpress.com/"><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">.com</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">, </span></a><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">crawled on 07/05/2012)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">When crossing it, I saw a number of tree trunks growing from trees that had been cut down</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">8</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Helai</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Papers, hairs, fabrics, or other thin and soft things</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Kemudian rebus dengan perbandingan air satu gelas dan dua </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">helai </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">daun papaya. </span><a href="http://www.sps.itb.ac.id/publikasi/s1p9s/en/daftar/cXgJgJw?Rm"><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">(</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">www.sps.itb.ac.id</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">,</span></a><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;"> crawled on 01/02/2014) </span><span class="font4">Then boil it with the ratio of one</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">5</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Bentuk</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">Rings,</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Ibu membeli 3</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">glass of water and</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 30 No.2</span></p>
<div>
<table border="1">
<tr><td colspan="3" style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">two papaya leaves</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">9</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Bilah</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Knives, swords, or other sharp things</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Di TKP, polisi menemukan dua </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">bilah </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">pisau dan ceceran darah di lantai atas.</span></p>
<p><a href="http://www.indosiar.com/patroli/36798/sering-menganggu-pemuda-dibunuh-saudaranya.html"><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">(</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">www.indosiar.com</span></a><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;"> </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">, crawled on 25/04/2012) </span><span class="font4">In the crime scene, polices found two knives and blood spills</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">10</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Utas</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Threads, ropes, or other small and long things</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Ada juga orang yang menggunakan dua </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">utas </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">tali atau rotan, yang diikat pada bebatuan di tepi sungai. </span><a href="http://pn-gunungsitoli.go.id/detail-show-70-134PidB2011PNGS"><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">(</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">pn-</span></a><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;"></span><a href="http://pn-gunungsitoli.go.id/detail-show-70-134PidB2011PNGS"><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">gunungsitoli.go.id</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">,</span></a><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;"> crawled on 31/01/2014) </span><span class="font4">There are some people using two ropes or rattan tied on the stone in the river bank</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">11</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Potong</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Shirts, pants, or part of things</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Artinya jangan sekali-sekali menyetrika hanya satu dua </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">potong </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">pakaian saja. (</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">sma.marsudirini-bgr.sch.id</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">, crawled on 07/02/2014) </span><span class="font4">It means never iron only one or two pieces of clothes</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">12</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Tangkai</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Flowers, pens, or other things having stalks/stems</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Dalam satu </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">tangkai</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">, saat bunga pertama mekar bisa bertahan hingga kuncup terakhir mekar.</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
</div><br clear="all">
<div>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><a href="http://digilib.stmik-aub.ac.id/gdl.php?mod=browse=faq=gray=green=english=gray"><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">(</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">digilib.stmik-</span></a><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;"></span><a href="http://digilib.stmik-aub.ac.id/gdl.php?mod=browse=faq=gray=green=english=gray"><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">aub.ac.id</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">, </span></a><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">crawled on 07/02/2014) </span><span class="font4">In one stalk, when the first blooming flower survives until the last bud blooms</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">13 &nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Butir</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">Marbles, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Jumlah telur</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">eggs, or &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">mencapai tiga </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">butir</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">other small &nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">setiap periode</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">and round &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">berbiak.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">things &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="http://www.kutilang.or.id/burung/konservasi/undan-kacamata/"><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">(</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">www.kutilang.or.id</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">, crawled on 03/02/2014) </span><span class="font4">There can be three eggs in each birth period</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">14 &nbsp;</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Pucuk</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">Letters or &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Kiai Yusuf dan</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">guns &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">pengawalnya hanya</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">memiliki tujuh </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">pucuk </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">senapan dan dua peti granat. </span><a href="http://hermawanrizal.wordpress.com/"><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">(</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">hermawanrizal.wo</span></a><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;"> </span><a href="http://hermawanrizal.wordpress.com/"><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">rdpress.com</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">,</span></a><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;"> crawled on 07/05/2012) </span><span class="font4">Kiai Yusuf and his guardians only have seven guns and two chests of grenades</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">15 &nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Carik</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Papers &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Saat diperiksa</span></p>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ternyata ada dua </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">carik </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">kertas yang ditemukan polisi di saku celana Ahmad.</span></p>
<p><a href="http://www.surya.co.id/2010/10/01/teroris-ecek-ecek-kena-bom-sendiri.html"><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">(</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">www.surya.co.id</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">,</span></a><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;"> crawled on 25/04/2012) </span><span class="font4">During the investigation, there are two letters</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
</div><br clear="all">
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 30 No.2</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">found by the polices inside Ahmad’s pocket</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">berkembang, semakin banyak. </span><a href="http://kolom.abatasa.co.id/kolom/detail/motivation/520/tebing-bunga-lily.html"><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">(</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">kolom.abatasa.co.i</span></a></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">16</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Rumpun</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Rice-plants, bamboo, or other plants in group</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Satu </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">rumpun </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ubi jalar yang dipanen hanya berisi satu ubi raksasa itu. </span><a href="http://jagb.journal.ipb.ac.id/index.php/jurnalilkom/comment/add/3125/2146/812645"><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">(</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">jagb.journal.ipb.ac</span></a><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;"> </span><a href="http://jagb.journal.ipb.ac.id/index.php/jurnalilkom/comment/add/3125/2146/812645"><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">.id</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">, </span></a><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">crawled on</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><a href="http://kolom.abatasa.co.id/kolom/detail/motivation/520/tebing-bunga-lily.html"><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">d</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">, </span></a><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">crawled on 31/01/2014) </span><span class="font4">From one bud to two buds, keep growing into more buds</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">13/02/2014)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">One harvested group of yam only consists of one giant yam</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">20</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Patah</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Words</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Tiada satu </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">patah </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">katapun yang kita ucapkan luput dari pendengaran Allah. </span><a href="http://darwisyah.staff.ipb.ac.id/en/page/3/"><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">(</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">darwisyah.staff.ipb</span></a></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">17</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Keping</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Coins</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Ratusan </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">keping </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">CD dan DVD pun mulai mengingatkanku pada banyak kisah.</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><a href="http://darwisyah.staff.ipb.ac.id/en/page/3/"><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">.ac.id</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">, </span></a><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">crawled on 29/01/2014) </span><span class="font4">There is no even one word we say that Allah misses</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><a href="http://k2oke.multiply.com/journal?==40"><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">(</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">k2oke.multiply.co</span></a><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;"> </span><a href="http://k2oke.multiply.com/journal?==40"><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">m</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">, </span></a><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">crawled on 07/05/2012) </span><span class="font4">Hundreds of CDs and DVDs start reminding me of many stories</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">21</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Laras</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Guns</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Padahal proyektil itu dari dua </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">laras </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">yang berbeda </span><a href="http://www.penjualan.web.id/tag/digital/"><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">(</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">www.penjualan.we</span></a><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;"> </span><a href="http://www.penjualan.web.id/tag/digital/"><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">b.id</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">, </span></a><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">crawled on 01/02/2014) </span><span class="font4">Even though that</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">18</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Biji</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">Eyes, corns, marbles, rice-plants</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Wanita itu membawa beberapa </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">biji </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">buah</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">projectile comes from two different barrels</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">limau sebagai hadiah untuk baginda.</span></p>
<p><a href="http://www.flexmedia.co.id/rasulullah-saw-dan-buah-limau/"><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">(</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">www.flexmedia.co.</span></a><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;"> </span><a href="http://www.flexmedia.co.id/rasulullah-saw-dan-buah-limau/"><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">id</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">, </span></a><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">crawled on 02/02/2014)</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">That lady brings several limes as a present for the majesty</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">22</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Kerat</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Breads, meats</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Ismail tetap tidak punya apa-apa kecuali tiga </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">kerat </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">roti untuk istrinya yang masih lemah itu.</span></p>
<p><a href="http://anangqhosym.blogspot.com/"><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">(</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">anangqhosym.blog</span></a><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;"> </span><a href="http://anangqhosym.blogspot.com/"><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">spot.com</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">, </span></a><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">crawled on 07/05/2012) </span><span class="font4">Ismail does not</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">19</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Kuntum</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4">Flowers</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Dari satu </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">kuntum </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">menjadi dua kuntum, berkembang lagi,</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:bottom;">
<p><span class="font4">have anything except three slices of bread for his weak wife</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">terus dan terus</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 30 No.2</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark17"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark18"></a>Table 2. Indonesian Classifiers and Their Functions in Sentences</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">Unlike Japanese, classifiers are optional in Indonesian language. Thus, it is perfectly fine to say </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">tiga roti</span><span class="font4"> instead of </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">tiga kerat roti.</span><span class="font4"> However, just like Japanese, Indonesian language has classifier that can replace other classifiers in the sentence, i.e. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">buah,</span><span class="font4"> therefore, all of the classifiers in the noun phrases, such as </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">tiga kerat roti, satu patah kata,</span><span class="font4"> dan </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">satu atau dua potong pakaian</span><span class="font4"> can be replaced with </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">buah,</span><span class="font4"> to be </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">tiga buah roti, satu buah kata,</span><span class="font4"> dan </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">satu atau dua buah pakaian.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">In general, Indonesian language has less classifier than Japanese, since Japanese has 350 classifiers to be used. However, only 19 of them are frequently used by the speakers. Surprisingly, despite its characteristic as an optional-classifier language, Indonesian language has 22 classifiers that are quite popular and frequently used by the native speakers although omission often occurs in spoken variation. Most of these classifiers are also formed based on the noun following them.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4">4.3. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Comparison</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">In terms of structure, Japanese classifiers are similar to those in Indonesian language. Japanese classifiers occur together with their numeral adjectives as in </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Ben wa Bensu o </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">kyuu dai </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">motteimasu</span><span class="font4">, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">watashi no </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">heya wa junikai </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ni arimasu, boku no </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">tanjoubi wa ichi gatsu </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">tsuitachi desu.</span><span class="font4"> In general, the structure of their noun phrase are presented as follows:</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark19"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark20"></a>N</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">1 </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">+ particle + numeral adjective + Cl</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">The N</span><span class="font3">1 </span><span class="font4">referes to the noun (</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Bensu, heya,</span><span class="font4"> and </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">tanjoubi</span><span class="font4">), particle refers to </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">o</span><span class="font4">, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">wa,</span><span class="font4"> and </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">wa,</span><span class="font4"> numeral adjective refers to </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">kyuu</span><span class="font4">, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">juuni,</span><span class="font4"> and </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ichi,</span><span class="font4"> and Cl refers to the classifier </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">dai, kai,</span><span class="font4"> and </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">gatsu</span><span class="font4">. Some Japanese classifiers are written attached to their numerals, other ones can be written sepearately, while the others change their forms when used with their numeral, such as </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">–nin</span><span class="font4">. To state </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">one person</span><span class="font4"> in Japanese, instead of saying </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ichi-nin</span><span class="font4"> the classifier</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">fuses with its numeral into </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">hitori,</span><span class="font4"> it also occurs in </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">futari</span><span class="font4"> to state </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">two people. –Nin</span><span class="font4"> is back into its original form as in </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">san-in</span><span class="font4"> (three people). The same case occurs in </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">–hon, -hiki,</span><span class="font4"> and </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">–fun</span><span class="font4"> which change their forms into –</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">pon, -piki,</span><span class="font4"> and </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">–pun</span><span class="font4"> to say </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ippon, ippiki,</span><span class="font4"> and </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ippun.</span><span class="font4"> These classifiers are back into their original form as in </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">juuni-hon, ni-hiki,</span><span class="font4"> and </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">yon-fun</span><span class="font4">. This kind of change, nevertheless, does not influence the meaning of the whole noun phrase. However, the omission of classifier brings change to the phrase since a numeral adjective only is unable to modify a noun, verb, or even adjective.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Now let us have a look at other sentences, </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">ni jikan </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">go ni aimashou!</span><span class="font4"> and </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">hitori (ichi-nin) </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">wa kowai kara iyadayo!</span><span class="font4"> that do not have any noun phrase. Both of the sentences use classifiers and the numeral adjectives as to modify the verb </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">aimashou</span><span class="font4"> and the adjective </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">kowai</span><span class="font4">. The classifiers’ structure is presented as follows:</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark21"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark22"></a>Numeral adjective + Cl</span></h2>
<p><span class="font4">The numeral adjective refers to </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ni</span><span class="font4"> and </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ichi</span><span class="font4"> in </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">hitori</span><span class="font4">, whereas the Cl refers to </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">jikan</span><span class="font4"> and </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">–nin</span><span class="font4"> (the classifiers). Since classifiers also belong to noun, it does not always have to be followed by another noun. These constructions are interesting; the first one shows how the classifier is not followed by noun, yet the particle and verb are following after it. The second construction has a fusion type classifier since it fuses with the noun </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">nin</span><span class="font4">. As a result, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">hitori</span><span class="font4"> is used and is more natural than </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ichi-nin</span><span class="font4">, same case is shown in </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">futari</span><span class="font4"> which is taken from </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ni-nin</span><span class="font4">, meaning two people.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Indonesian classifiers are more likely to show similar nature as Japanese when being used in phrase or construction in terms of structure, in which they have to occur together with the numeral classifiers. Corpus of Indonesian language have collected a number of possible constructions, and some of them are presented as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;…padahal proyektil itu dari </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">dua laras </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">yang berbeda;</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Ismail tetap tidak punya apa-apa kecuali </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">tiga kerat roti </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">untuk istrinya yang masih lemah itu</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 30 No.2</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">These constructions can be presented in the following structure:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark23"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark24"></a>a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Numeral adjective + Cl + (N</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">1</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">)</span><br><br><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark25"></a>b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Numeral adjective + Cl + N</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">1</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">The numeral adjective refers to </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">dua</span><span class="font4"> and </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">tiga,</span><span class="font4"> the Cl refers to the determiners </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">kerat</span><span class="font4"> and </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">laras,</span><span class="font4"> while N</span><span class="font3">1 </span><span class="font4">refers to </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">roti</span><span class="font4"> and </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">senjata</span><span class="font4"> which is omitted in the first construction. In the first construction, it is possible to omit the noun that should follow the classifier, the noun should be </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">senjata</span><span class="font4">, however, it has been mentioned previously, making the context clear. Furthermore, Indonesian classifier can show similar nature to those in Japanese in terms of fusion. When Japanese has the </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">hitori</span><span class="font4"> and </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">futari, </span><span class="font4">Indonesian language has </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">se-,</span><span class="font4"> meaning “one” to indicate something singular, for example </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">satu orang</span><span class="font4"> becomes </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">seorang, satu buah</span><span class="font4"> into </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">sebuah, satu batang</span><span class="font4"> into </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">sebatang, satu kerat</span><span class="font4"> into </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">sekerat. </span><span class="font4">This form, however, is considered more natural than saying </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">satu batang</span><span class="font4">. Fortunately, this change does not affect the meaning of the whole noun phrase.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Other characteristics of Indonesian classifiers and numerals adjectives are some numeral classifiers can be replaced with </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">beberapa </span><span class="font4">if the speakers are not sure or do not know about the amount of the thing. In addition to replacement of numeral, classifiers can also be omitted in a sentence to sound more casual. Thus, it is also permitted to say another form such as </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">dua senjata </span><span class="font4">where the classifier is omitted and only the numeral adjective and the noun are left.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark26"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark27"></a>4. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">Classifiers has been integral part of a language, yet each language has its respective way in treating and use classifiers. Japanese and Indonesian languages clearly depict the nature of classifiers through its constructions. Japanese language has 19 classifiers consisting of two absolutely must-know counters and seventeen must-know counters, whereas Indonesian language has twenty-two classifiers to use. Japanese is an</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">obligatory classifiers language since a numeral adjective only cannot modify nouns, verbs, or even adjectives. In contrast with Indonesian language that treats classifiers as optional, thus it is natural to say a numeral adjective that is directly followed by a noun. In other words, semantically speaking, Indonesian and Japanese classifiers are different to the point that their presence affect the meaning of the whole phrase, even in Indonesian language, classifiers are often omitted to avoid formality. Nevertheless, a similar aspect exists where both Japanese and Indonesian languages allow fusion for the classifiers with the noun as in </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">hitori (ichi-nin)</span><span class="font4">, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ippiki (ichi-hiki)</span><span class="font4">, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ippon (ichi-hon)</span><span class="font4">, and </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">ippun (ichi-fun)</span><span class="font4">, </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">sebatang rokok, sekuntum bunga,</span><span class="font4"> and </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">sepiring nasi,</span><span class="font4"> yet the meaning remains the same.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Syntactically, there is no much difference of the structure formed by Japanese and Indonesian classifiers. Both languages’ classifiers are written after numeral adjectives. However, Japanese allows the classifiers, together with numeral adjective forming a noun phrase, to precede particles (</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">wo/ha/mo)</span><span class="font4"> and verbs or adjectives to modify them.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark28"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark29"></a>5. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;References</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font4">(2022). Diambil kembali dari Corpora Uni Leipzig: https://corpora.uni-</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">leipzig.de/en?corpusId=ind_mixed_2013</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">(2022). Diambil kembali dari Tofugu: </span><a href="https://www.tofugu.com/japanese/japanese-counters-list/"><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://www.tofugu.com/japanese/japanese-</span></a><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;"></span><a href="https://www.tofugu.com/japanese/japanese-counters-list/"><span class="font4" style="text-decoration:underline;">counters-list/</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font4">Alanshari, M.Z., Ikmal.H., Muflich, M.F., Khasanah, S.U. (2022). IMPLEMENTASI METODE TALAQQIDALAM PEMBELAJARAN TAHFIDZUL QUR’AN. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Al-Mada: Jurnal Agama Sosisal &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;dan &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Budaya.</span><span class="font4"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;https://e-</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">journal.ikhac.ac.id/index.php/almada/article/view/2 623/1030</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Vol. 30 No.2</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Allan, K. (1977). Classifiers. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Linguistic Society of America</span><span class="font4">, 285-311.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Aziz, A. O. (2009). Classifier Construction in English. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">J.Edu.Sci</span><span class="font4">, 2.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Bender, E. M. (2004). Implementing the Syntax of Japanese Numeral Classifiers. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Natural Language Processing–IJCNLP 2004: First International Joint Conference</span><span class="font4"> (hal. pp. 626-635). Hainan Island, China: Springer Berlin Heidelberg.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Cherry, C. (2011). </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Analisis Konstrastif Kata Bantu BIlangan dalam Bahasa Indonesia dan Bahasa Mandarin .</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Croft, W. (1994). Semantic Universals in Classifier Systems. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Word</span><span class="font4">, 145-171.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Dewi, K.A.R., Sedeng, I.N., Soethama, P.L. (2021). Derivational Adjectives Found in Forrest Gump Novel. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Linguistika</span><span class="font4">, 109-205.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Lehrer, A. (1986). English Classifiers Constructions. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Lingua</span><span class="font4">, 109-148.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Novitasari, I.G.A.M.I. (2020). Struktur Makna Ambiguitas Partikel ‘No’ dalam Percakapan Bahasa Jepang pada Siswa Level 1C di Pandan College. </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Linguistika</span><span class="font4">, 48-61.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Sudo, Y. (2016). The Semantic Role of Classifiers in Japanese . </span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">Baltic International Yearbook of Cognition, Logic and Communication</span><span class="font4">, 115.</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Wahyuni, L.M.S., Purnawati, K.W. (2020). Sufiks –m(u) sebagai Pembentuk Verba Deadjektiva Bahasa Jepang: &nbsp;&nbsp;Kajian</span></p>
<p><span class="font4">Morfologi dan Metabahasa Semantik Alami (MSA)</span><span class="font4" style="font-style:italic;">. Linguistika,</span><span class="font4"> 150-156.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">124</span></p>