---
layout: full_article
title: "Positive Politeness Strategy in the Conversation of "Me Before You" Movie"
author: "Ni Putu Wahyu Febriyani, Ni Luh Sutjiati Beratha, Ni Wayan Sukarini"
categories: stilistika
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/stilistika/full-85774 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/stilistika/id-85774"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/stilistika/full-85774"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;">STILISTIKA</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Journal of Indonesian Language and Literature</span><span class="font3"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Vol. 02, No.02: April 2023, 80-90</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">ISSN : 2528-4940</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>POSITIVE POLITENESS STRATEGY IN THE CONVERSATION OF </span><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">ME BEFORE YOU</span><span class="font5" style="font-weight:bold;"> MOVIE</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Ni Putu Wahyu Febriyani<sup>1*</sup>, Ni Luh Sutjiati Beratha<sup>2</sup>, dan Ni Wayan Sukarini<sup>3 </sup></span><span class="font1">Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font1"><sup>*)</sup> surel:</span><a href="mailto:wahyufebriyani1902@gmail.com"><span class="font1"> </span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">wahyufebriyani1902@gmail.com</span></a><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;"> </span><span class="font1">doi:</span><a href="https://doi.org/10.24843/STIL.2023.v02.i02.p08"><span class="font1"> </span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://doi.org/10.24843/STIL.2023.v02.i02.p08</span></a><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;"> </span><span class="font1">Artikel dikirim:22 April 2022; diterima: 22 Mei 2022</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstract. </span><span class="font1">This paper entitled </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Positive Politeness Strategy in the Conversation of Me Before You Movie</span><span class="font1">. The aims was to identify the positive politeness strategy and to explain the factor influencing the characters used positive politeness strategies based on the theory of Brown and Levinson (1987). The data was taken from the utterance between characters in the movie. The data was collected through the documentation method by taking-note technique, this article used qualitative method to analyze the data, the method of presenting data analysis was the informal method. This article used the politeness theory proposed by Brown and Levinson. Based on the theory above, there was nine strategies of positive politeness found in this movie. Furthermore, the factor influencing this article is positive politeness payoff. The results of this article show that in </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Me Before You</span><span class="font1"> movie the characters used nine out of fifteen strategies in positive politeness. The nine strategies that was found in the utterances of the characters are strategy 2 (exaggerate), strategy 3 (intensify interest to H), strategy 4 (use ingroup identity markers), strategy 5 (seek agreement), strategy 6 (avoid disagreement), strategy 10 (offer and promise), strategy 11 (be optimistic), strategy 12 (include both S and H in the activity), and strategy 15 (give gifts to H (goods, sympathy, understanding, cooperation)). Meanwhile, the factor influencing this article is positive politeness payoffs.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Keywords: me before you, politeness, politeness strategy</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>INTRODUCTION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">Positive and negative faces are the two types of faces. Positive face, according to Brown and Levinson (1987), is the desire of every member that his desires be acceptable to at least some others. Meanwhile, negative politeness is the desire for every 'competent adult member' to be able to behave without assistance from others. There are four types of politeness strategies are explained by Brown and Levinson summarizing human &quot;politeness&quot;.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Positive politeness, and indirect off-record strategies. Politeness is a universal phenomenon that exists in all cultures is described as considering the feelings of others (Holmes, 1992:296). When speaking with others, politeness is the way to convey anything. Politeness can also be characterized as a tool for recognizing respect in communication. To create good communication between the two, both the speaker and the hearer strive to use a polite strategy to reduce the possibility of mutual facial injuries. According to Brown and Levinson (1987), the speaker and hearer in a</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">ISSN : 2528-4940</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">conversation both have positive and negative faces. Both faces should be retained. The term face itself refers to the public self-image that every member wants to assert for himself. This article, on either hand, focuses on positive politeness strategies.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Positive politeness, according to Brown and Levinson (1987: 70), tries to satisfy the hearer's positive face by acknowledging or engaging the hearer like a friend or group member. Since we occur in everyday conversation, it is very close to the phenomenon of positive politeness strategy. For example, if a native English speaker says &quot;Your English was good&quot; but you don't know what it is, you can say &quot;He, that's not true&quot; and the answer in the English community is it is considered rude because it is rare. If both the speaker and the hearer share the same knowledge about a strategy of politeness, they apply that strategy. Positive politeness is redress directed to the addressee’s positive face (Brown and Levinson, 1987:101). It consists of fifteen different strategies that usually found in the utterance or conversation. Positive politeness is chosen over the other three politeness because positive politeness has the most strategies and it is challenging to be analyzed. Moreover, positive politeness is easy to find in the daily conversation because it is used by the participants who have close relation such as between friends and family. This article observed and analyzed positive politeness strategies that are used in the utterance or conversation of the characters in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Me Before You</span><span class="font2"> movie</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>RESULTS AND DISCISSIONS</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">This chapter identifies the positive politeness strategy contained in Me Before You Movie. The characters used nine out of fifteen strategies in positive politeness. The nine strategies that was found in the utterances of the characters are strategy 2 (exaggerate), strategy 3 (intensify interest to H), strategy 4 (use in-group identity markers), strategy 5 (seek agreement), strategy 6 (avoid disagreement), strategy 10 (offer and promise), strategy 11 (be optimistic), strategy 12 (include both S and H in the activity), and strategy 15 (give gifts to H (goods, sympathy, understanding, cooperation)). Meanwhile, the factor influencing this article is positive politeness payoff.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Strategy 2: Exaggerate (interest, approval, sympathy with H).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">According to Brown and Levinson (1987), this strategy is often done with the use of exaggerated intonation, stress, and other aspects of prosodic components.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">(1)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Josie: We are celebrating Lou!</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Bernard: I’ve got a job!</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Lou: Oh! Dad, that is fantastic!</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">ISSN : 2528-4940</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Lou is overjoyed that her father has got a well-paying job after a longer period of unemployment. In the dialogue, Lou, as the speaker, stated to Bernard, as the hearer, &quot;Oh Dad, that is fantastic!&quot;. Speaker employs method 2 (exaggerate) of positive politeness by using the word &quot;fantastic&quot; in her sentence to express how happy she is when she heard that her father finally got a job. Speaker used exaggerated intonation and stress to convey Speaker's (Lou) feelings for Hearer (Bernard) and to express that Speaker is happy with what Hearer received.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">(2)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Will: Just do it!</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Lou: No, I can't, I can't and it's gonna be too deep, I can't.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Will: You can, you can do anything.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Lou: Why didn't you make me do that earlier?! That was amazing!</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Will: I don't know, Clark. Some people just won't be told!</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Will pushed Lou to go diving because Will believe that Lou would be like it, but she refused because she was too afraid of diving. Will told Lou that she would be fine and that she would not be unhappy. And finally, she gave it a try and was blown away by the underwater view. She screamed at Will when she finished and returned to the surface, &quot;Why didn't you make me do it earlier?! That was amazing!&quot; In the conversation with Will, Lou, as the speaker, used the exaggerative word &quot;amazing&quot; she’s so happy to see the view of underwater that she never sees it before. Speaker (Lou) uses this feature to give Hearer (Will) his approval and show that she agrees with him. Another feature of this positive politeness method is the use of exaggerative words or particles, as seen above.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Strategy 3: Intensify Interest to H.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">This strategy is also aimed to pull Hearer into the event being discussed to increase</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Hearer’s interest in the conversation (Brown and Levinson, 106:1987).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">(3)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Lou: When I was little, my mom got me a pair of glittery wellies. And I refused to take them off. I wore them in bed, in the bath, all summer long. My favourite outfit was the glittery boots and my bumblebee tights.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Will: Bumblebee tights?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Lou: Black and yellow stripes! Will &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: Oh, dear God!</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Lou: And I really really really liked having stripy legs.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Lou talked about her childhood, her favorite dress, and how she used to love singing Molahonkey with her father. The speaker was telling a good story to the hearer, to share some of Speaker’s experience.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">ISSN : 2528-4940</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">(4)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Lou : Patrick, this is really important.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Patrick: Do you know how this feels? It's like I'm running permanently just a little behind the rest of the field. It's like there is something bad around the bend and everyone seems to know what it is, except me.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">When Patrick noticed the list Lou had made for her vacation to Mauritius island with Will and Nathan after they finished their dinner. He was furious at Lou because he believed he had been cheated by him. Patric was so angry with Lou, Patrick's utterance demonstrates the use of strategy 3 (intensify interest to hearer), which intensifies Hearer's attention. He was creating a story in order to interest Hearer's (Lou) attention. The speaker also employed vivid present in data 4, which is a common aspect of good politeness discourse, by pulling Hearer right into the heart of the event being discussed. His words &quot;Do you know how this feel?&quot; is a defining moment. Hearer's intrinsic interest in the speaker may increase if this feature is used.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Strategy 4: Use in group identity marker.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">This strategy uses the address form of group membership which include generic names and terms of address such as honey, buddy, sweetheart, and daddy.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">(5) .</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Josie &nbsp;: I know it's not how you like to dress.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Lou &nbsp;&nbsp;: Is this like how anyone likes to dress?!</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Josie : It served me very well. Lou &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;: in 1983!</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Josie : Styles change, love, but smart remains smart.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Lou's mother, Josie, gave her an old suit for the interview because her mother wants to make Lou’s looks different from usually. Lou first rejected it she doesn’t like the looks like, claiming that because it was not her style. Josie, on the other hand, demanded her wear it and claimed that it made her look smart and looks formal. &quot;Styles change, love, but smart remains smart”. The inclusion of the identification marker &quot;love&quot; in the exchange above indicates a close relationship between the speaker (Josie) and the hearer (Lou).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Strategy 5: Seek Agreement.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The speaker might use safe topics as a way in claiming common ground with the hearer, in which the hearer might agree with the speaker. Meanwhile, the repetition can be done by repeating some part of the speaker’s utterance. It indicates that H has paid enough attention and heard correctly of what the speaker has said (Brown and Levinson, 112:1987).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">ISSN : 2528-4940</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">(6) .</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Patrick: Hey, listen.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Lou: Yeah?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Patrick: About the holiday.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Lou: Yeah?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Patrick: How do you fancy... Norway?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Lou: Norway! Wow! Yeah! Okay. Whoo!</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">When Patrick was finished, he approached Lou and reminded her of their holiday plans. He stated that they will spend their holiday in Norway with beautiful view. Lou was shocked by what Patrick had just said because she had not expected Patrick to organize such a luxury holiday for them. She was excited and repeated Patrick's uttering of the word &quot;Norway.&quot; The participant's use of this strategy in the dialogue is highlighted by the use of repetition. The use of repetition by the hearer, together with the choice of safe topics, is one of the features of this method, according to Brown and Levinson (1987).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Strategy 6: Avoid Disagreement.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Speaker may then opt to be unclear about his opinion in order to disguise his disagreement with Hearer while hedging opinions (Brown and Levinson, 113116:1987).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">(7) .</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Nathan: His blood pressure goes up and down and he's constantly open to infection.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Lou: But there’s medical advances taking place all the time. Right?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Nathan: Well, yeah. But no one's worked out how to fix a spinal cord yet.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Lou asked of Nathan about Will's ability to recover to back normal. Will isn't going to get any better because the paralyzed was permanent, Nathan said. When Lou asked Nathan, &quot;But there are medical advances taking place all the time, right?&quot; he showed the focus of this strategy. Nathan appears to disagree with Lou's opinion, but in order to preserve the positive face of the hearer (Lou), he responded by saying &quot;Well, yeah&quot; to suggest that he agrees with H, but then he responded again by saying &quot;But no one's worked out how to fix a spinal cord yet.” Speaker is twisting his utterance by saying “yes, but...” to hide his disagreement rather than just say “no” because Speaker wants to save Hearer’s positive face.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Strategy 10: Offer, promise.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">This strategy used in order to redress the potential threat of some FTAs, that the speaker may choose to stress his cooperation with the hearer in another way (Brown and Levinson, 125:1987).</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">ISSN : 2528-4940</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">(8) .</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Camilia: Then let's introduce you to Will. He should be dressed by now. He has good days and bad days.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Lou: Mrs. Traynor, I won't let you down.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Camilia: Good</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Lou said in response to Camilia's statement that Will has good and terrible days. The speaker, Lou, used a promising strategy, which is one of the strategies in Brown and Levinson's positive politeness theory (1987). The phrase &quot;I won't let you down&quot; implies a promise made by the speaker, Lou, in order to satisfy the hearer’s positive attitude (Camilia).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Strategy 11: Be optimistic.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The speaker should assume that what the hearer wants is also what he wants in this positive politeness strategy. In other words, they are interested in the same things.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">(9) .</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Josie : Lou will get another job. She has a lot of potential.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Bernard: There are no jobs, Josie, I should know. Look, I'm just saying, we needed that money.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Josie : Let's not panic, eh? She'll find something. Won’t you Lou?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">When Lou's father found out she was leaving her job, he was furious because the family really needed more money. Lou's mother tried to reassure her husband by telling him not to worry and that Lou would find another job because she had so much potential. She promised her husband that Lou has a lot of potential and that she would soon find another job. As a result, there was no need to be concerned. The speaker attempted to diminish the size of the peril that the hearer was face.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">(10)</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Nathan: I am going to walk Karen back to her hotel. Because she shouldn't walk back alone, you know?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Will: How chivalrous of you!</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Lou: Yeah, very civic minded.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Nathan: Ah, piss off, the both of you!</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Lou: Yeah, I've got everything covered. Don’t worry.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Will: We’ll be fine.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Nathan: Alright, yeah, we'll see you later.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Nathan wanted to walk Karen back to her hotel in the evening. Before that, Nathan asked Lou and Will if it was acceptable for him to leave them because Nathan is Will's nurse and is responsible for Will's medical requirements. Lou and Will both</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">ISSN : 2528-4940</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">agreed it was fine if he left them because Lou would take over his place and look after Will. Will also responds it by saying that they will be fine if Nathan not there so he can go with Karen. The use of this strategy can be seen in Lou and Will’s utterances. When Nathan asking for their permission to go, Lou replied it by saying “Yeah, I've got everything covered. Don’t worry” and Will said “We’ll be fine”. Lou and Will try to minimize the threat that the hearer (Nathan) faces in these utterances. They were expressing their optimism that everything would be OK while Nathan was away because Lou had Will's needs taken care of.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Strategy 12: Include both S and H in the activity.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">This strategy demonstrates that Speaker is just as eager as Hearer to have the activity completed (Brown and Levinson, 1987:127).</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">(11) .</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Camilia: Would you like the job?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Lou: Yes!</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Camilia: Can you start immediately?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Lou: Yes!</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Camilia: Good. Then let's go and meet Will.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Camilia's statement when she asked Lou to meet Will is the main focus of this strategy's use in the dialogue. Camilia, as the speaker, said “Good. Then let's go and meet Will”. In that utterance, Speaker used the inclusive form “let’s” to invites Hearer performing some action together. It shows that Speaker tries to engage with Hearer in the action or activity that Speaker really wants to do.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">(12)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Lou: So how much for a premier area badge? What would you like, another ten more, perhaps twenty?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Waitress: We don't sell badges Madam, this is a restaurant. You will need to go to the ticket office to buy it.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Will: Louisa? Let's go.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The discussion took place in the horse racing restaurant, where Lou, Will, and Nathan was planning to eat lunch. The server, however, informed them that the establishment only serves premier badge holders. Knowing this, Lou became angry and began shouting with the waitress. She wanted to purchase the premier badge, but the waiter informed her that she would have to purchase it at the ticket office. Will attempted to solve the situation by persuading Lou to go while claiming that he was not yet hungry. Lou eventually gave up because she saw Will was distressed, and the two of them came back home. The use of this strategy which includes Speaker and Hearer in the activity can be seen in Will’s utterance when he asked Lou to go “Louisa,</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">ISSN : 2528-4940</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">let’s go”. In this dialogue, Will as the speaker, used the inclusive word “let’s” to invites Lou, as the hearer, doing the activity together. The activity in this context of a conversation is to go back home.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">9.St rategy 15: Give gifts to H (goods, sympathy, understanding, cooperation). (13).</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Will: There's something for you in my bag as well.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Joisie: You got Lou a present? That’s very kind of you. Wasn’t that kind Bernard?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Bernard: That’s very kind.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Lou: Oh, it’s very lovely. Oh my God, I don’t believe it! But where did you get them!?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Will: That is a secret.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Patrick: Tights?</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Lou: Only the best pair of tights, ever! I am going to try them on! Oh, I can't tell you how much I love them. Really, thanks.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">This strategy is centered on Will's utterance, which says “There's something for you in my bag as well”. The utterance means that Will was bringing and giving a present for Lou, which categorized as a tangible gift. This action of Speaker (Will), showed that he knew some of Hearer’s (Lou’s) wants, and therefore, he wanted to help Hearer in fulfilling her wants.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">The factors influencing the application of positive politeness strategies by the characters in “Me Before You” movie discussed in this section.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">(1)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Josie: I know it's not how you like to dress.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Lou: Is this like how anyone likes to dress?!</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Josie: It served me very well. Lou : in 1983!</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Josie: Styles change, love, but smart remains smart.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">From the utterance, it indicated that Speaker wanted to satisfy the positive face of Hearer and showing some respect. According to Brown and Levinson theory (1987), through positive politeness payoff. The speaker in data 5 used the term 'love,' which was used as a group identity marker. Lou's mother, Josie, informed her that the suit made her appear smart, despite the fact that it was a touch out of style. The speaker attempted to express her affection and attention to the hearer by using the term 'love.' Speaker sought to please Hearer's positive face by showing some respect, as evidenced by the utterance. According to Brown and Levinson (1987), Speaker can satisfy Hearer's positive face through positive politeness payoff. This is also referred to as Speaker's action in reducing the threat to Hearer's face. Speaker can satisfy Hearer’s</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">ISSN : 2528-4940</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">positive face. This is also categorized as S’s action in minimizing the face threatening aspect to Hearer.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font2">(2)</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font2">Josie: We are celebrating Lou!</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Bernard: I’ve got a job!</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Lou: Oh! Dad, that is fantastic!</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">When Josie told Lou that her father had finally gotten a job, the two started a conversation. Lou was happy for her father, and she used the word &quot;fantastic&quot; to express her feelings of pride in her accomplishment. The speaker used a positive politeness strategy that was influenced by the factor of payoffs. Speaker demonstrated that she, also, wants what Hearer wants, and she attempted to satisfy Hearer's positive face.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">After finding the politeness that used by characters and why the characters use politeness strategies proposed by Brown and Levinson theories in Me Before You Movie, this section presented the discussion of the result of finding section.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>CONCLUSION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">This article examines the use of positive politeness strategies in the movie </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Me Before You</span><span class="font2">. Following the analysis presented in the previous chapters, below are the conclusions that can be drawn based on the article's research problems.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In the conversations or utterances, the characters in the movie </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Me Before You </span><span class="font2">employ nine of Brown and Levinson's (1987) fifteen positive politeness tactics. These are strategies 2 (exaggerate), 3 (intensify interest in H), 4 (use in-group identity markers), 5 (seek agreement), 6 (avoid disagreement), 10 (offer and promise), 11 (be optimistic), 12 (include both S and H in the activity), and 15 (give gifts to H (goods, sympathy, understanding, cooperation)). By using these strategies, the speaker can satisfy the positive face of hearer and reduce the distance that exist between the speaker and hearer.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">In using such kind of positive politeness strategies, the speaker also influences by some factors. . The factor influencing that contains in this thesis is positive politeness payoff which found in two data’s.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>REFERENCES</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2">Astuti, H. B. 2017. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">The Use of Politeness Strategies in the Conversation between Ben Whittaker and Jules Ostin in The Intern Movie</span><span class="font2">. (article). Sanata Dharma University, Yogyakarta.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Brown, P. &amp;&nbsp;Levinson, S. 1999. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Politeness: some universal in language usage, in A.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">ISSN : 2528-4940</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Brown, Penelope and Levinson .S.C.</span><span class="font2">1987. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Politeness: Some universal in language usage. </span><span class="font2">Cambridge: Cambridge Unviversity Press. ISBN 978-0-521-3135-1.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Cutting, J. 2002. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Pragmatics and Discourse: A resource book for students</span><span class="font2">. New York: Routledge.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Goffman, E. 1955. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">On Face-work: An Analysis of Ritual Elements of Social Interaction. </span><span class="font2">Psychiatry: Journal for the Article of Interpersonal Processes 18(3), 213-231. Reprinted in Goffman (2005, pp. 5–46).</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Goffman, E. 1967. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Interaction Ritual</span><span class="font2">. New York: Garden City.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Goody, E. N. 1996. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Questions and Politeness</span><span class="font2">. London-New York- Melbourne. Cambridge University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Holmes, J. 1992. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">An Introduction to Sociolinguistics</span><span class="font2">. New York: Longman Inc.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Jeihan, J.A. 2014. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">A Pragmatic Analysis of Positive Politeness Strategies as Reflected by The Characters in Carnage Movie</span><span class="font2">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Olorus, D. 2020. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Pilot article: Politeness Strategies in selected DoctorPatient Interactions in Ibadan Private Hospitals</span><span class="font2">. International Journal of Research and Innovation in Social Science (IJRISS) .</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Leech, G.1992. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Principles of pragmatics</span><span class="font2">. London: Longman.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Levinson, S. C. (1983). </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Pragmatics</span><span class="font2">. New York: Cambridge University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Rosari, M. 2016. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Politeness Strategies Applied by the Characters of The Great Debaters Movie</span><span class="font2">. LLT: A Journal on Language and Language Teaching. Volume 19, No.1.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Yule, G. 1998. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Pragmatics</span><span class="font2"> (Revised Ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>AUTHOR PROFILE</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Ni Putu Wahyu Febriyani </span><span class="font2">is a student of the English Literature Program Class of 2018. In 2018, he has participated in various committees held by faculties and study programs.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Prof. Dr. Ni Luh Sutjiati Beratha, M.A. </span><span class="font2">is a professor in Semantics at the English Department Faculty of Arts Udayana University was graduated from Australian universities. She was completed her master program at the Department of Linguistics, Monash University Melbourne Australia in 1989, and Ph.D. degree was gained from the Australian National University (ANU) Canberra Australia in 1992. She was the Dean of the Faculty of Arts Udayana University from 2015 until 2019.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Dr. Ni Wayan Sukarini, M.Hum. </span><span class="font2">is a lecturer at English Department, Faculty of Arts, Udayana University. She finishes the years of study from undergraduate until post graduate at the same institution where she works. she studies linguistics and her</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">ISSN : 2528-4940</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Vol. 02, No.02: April 2023, 80-90</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">majors are semantics and semiotics. Some researchers have been done individually and in team.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">90</span></p>