---
layout: full_article
title: "The Relationship between Academic Stress with Coping Mechanism of PSSKPN Students of Udayana University"
author: "Flora Maranatha Hasugian, Ni Kadek Ayu Suarningsih, I Kadek Saputra"
categories: jsgs
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/jsgs/full-98066 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/jsgs/id-98066"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/jsgs/full-98066"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font1">Journal of A Sustainable Global South, p-ISSN: 2579-6062</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font4"><a name="bookmark1"></a>The Relationship between Academic Stress with Coping Mechanism of PSSKPN Students of Udayana University</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2">Flora Maranatha Hasugian<sup>1</sup>, Ni Kadek Ayu Suarningsih<sup>2</sup>, I Kadek Saputra<sup>3</sup></span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Nursing Study Program</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Faculty of Medicine, Udayana University, Denpasar, Bali </span><a href="mailto:ayusuarningsih@unud.ac.id"><span class="font1">ayusuarningsih@unud.ac.id</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1">Nursing Study Program</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Faculty of Medicine, Udayana University, Denpasar, Bali</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Nursing Study Program</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Faculty of Medicine, Udayana University, Denpasar, Bali</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstract </span><span class="font1">The academic education process faced by nursing students is a source of considerable stressors to trigger academic stress. Academic stress would affect the way they deal with the stressors that called coping mechanism response. The purpose of this study was to determine the relationship between academic stress with coping mechanism on PSSKPN students of Udayana University. This study was correlative research with cross sectional approach. This study consisted of 57 respondents obtained by total sampling technique. The data collection was used academic stress questionnaire and ways of coping questionnaire to identified respondent characteristics, academic stress and coping mechanism. This study showed there was a significant correlation between academic stress with the coping mechanism (</span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">p</span><span class="font1"> &lt;0.05; r= 0.517). The correlation was negative and had a medium strength, which means when the academic stress gets higher, the coping mechanism gets lower. This study is expected to be an evaluation for students, education institutions, and nurses as health workers. Actions to reduce academic stress and improve adaptive coping mechanism also expected could be carried out.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Index Terms</span><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">— Academic Stress, Coping Mechanism, PSSKPN students</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font1"><a name="bookmark3"></a>I.</span><span class="font1" style="font-variant:small-caps;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Introduction</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Education is an important part of human life. Indonesia’s government has set a 12 years education program (for elementary, junior high school, and senior high school) and 3.5-4 years program for bachelor's degrees for better future of Indonesia's society [1]. Education in the university consisted of academic and non-academic activity. Academic activity can be a massive stressor source for the student. This is due to various factors, such as inability to adapt, too many tasks, and high academic demand or expectation [2]. An academic-demand related stress is termed as academic stress.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">A study conducted by Gupta, et al. [3] showed that the academic stressor highly contributed to medical student’s stress in Kolkata India with a percentage of 94.4%. A study was done by Purwati [4], also shows that 43.3% of Indonesia University’s nursing students experiencing moderate stress and 11.5% were experiencing severe stress. These findings indicated that stress is a common</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">phenomenon happened to medical students because of their academic demand.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The level of academic stress is a factor that affected the ability to choose an appropriate coping mechanism [5]. Stuart [6] defined coping mechanisms as an effort to deal with stress and could play a role as individual defense mechanisms. Coping mechanism was classified into adaptive and maladaptive coping mechanism Adaptive coping mechanism is coping mechanism that supported the function of integration, while maladaptive coping mechanism is coping mechanism that blocks the function of integration [7].</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The nursing student is a future nurse who is going to provide nursing care to clients. Professional nurses produced by high-quality academic processes in nursing school. This academic process can be a major stressor source for the nursing students because it demanded critical-thinking, memorizing, and accuracy ability for the student [8].</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">A pilot study done among the nursing student in the Nursing Department, Faculty of Medicine, Udayana University found that there were only 15 students (13.3%) with normal stress levels, and the rest of it were</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">experiencing severe stress and extremely severe stress. Stress could impact negatively on student’s academic performances and the ability to make proper decisions [9]. To deal with the stress, nursing students need to use adaptive coping mechanisms. This study aimed to know the relationship between the academic stress with coping mechanism on PSSKPN Students of Udayana University.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font1"><a name="bookmark5"></a>II.</span><span class="font1" style="font-variant:small-caps;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Method</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">This was a quantitative study using a cross-sectional approach. Statistical analysis was done by using Pearson Product Moment test because the data were distributed normally.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The study population was the entire 3rd year nursing student in the Nursing Study Program, Faculty of Medicine, Udayana University. Based on the total sampling technique the participants needed were 57 students. This study was conducted in the second week until the third week in May 2019 in the Nursing Department, Faculty of Medicine, Udayana University.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">This is consisted of two variables, academic stress as the independent variable and coping mechanism as the dependent variable.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The researcher and two enumerators did the data collection. After the Faculty of Medicine of Udayana University granted the study, the data collection was done on the participant. The data collection was done using the questionnaire Academic Stress Questionnaire which already modified by Purwati [4] and Ways of Coping Questionnaire which also already modified by Kamas [10]. Based on the validity test there were 42 valid questions in the Academic Stress Questionnaire and 23 valid questions on the Ways of Coping Questionnaire. The reliability test also showed that the entire valid questions item was reliable. The data that had been collected then analyzed using a computer program. This study fulfilled the ethical aspects of informed consent, autonomy, anonymity, confidentiality, justice, beneficence, non-maleficence, and veracity. The Ethical Committee of Faculty Medicine of Udayana University also already granted this study.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font1"><a name="bookmark7"></a>III.</span><span class="font1" style="font-variant:small-caps;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Result</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the demography data, the majority of the students who participated in this study were aged 21 years old (45.6%), female (86%), and having a very good grade point (GPA) average (82.5%).</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The participant’s academic stress distribution is shown in Table 1.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">TABLE 1. PARTICIPANT’S ACADEMIC STRESS</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">Variable</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">Median</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">Minimum</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Maximum</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">CI 95%</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">Academic Stress</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">44</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">24-81</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">42.30 – 49.49</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font0">*data wasn’t distributed normally</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Table 1 shows that the median on the academic stress data is 44 with a variability of 183.17. Ninety-five percent of the academic score was in the range of 42.30-49.49. The lowest score was 24 and the highest score was 81.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">There were 36 participants (63,1%) having moderate level of academic stress. The categorization of the academic stress is shown in Table 2.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">TABLE 2. PARTICIPANT’S ACADEMIC STRESS</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Category</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Score</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Number (n)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Percentage (%)</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">Normal</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">0 - 23</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">0</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">0%</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">Mild Stress</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">24 - 33</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">7</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">12.3%</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">Moderate Stress</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">34 - 52</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">36</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">63.1%</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">Severe Stress</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">53 - 74</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">11</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">19.3%</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">Extremely Severe Stress</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">≥75</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">3</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">5.3%</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font1">The distribution of participant’s coping mechanisms is shown in Table 3.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">TABLE 3. PARTICIPANT’S COPING MECHANISM</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Variable</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Mean ± SD</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">MinimumMaximum</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">CI 95%</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">Coping</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">58.88 ± 4.71</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">45 – 72</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">57.63 –</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">Mechanism</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:top;"></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">60.13</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font0">*normal data distribution</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The mean data of the coping mechanism was 58.88 (SD = 4.71) with the lowest score was 45 and the highest score was 72. We estimated that 95% of the data was in the range of 57.63 until 60.13.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">After categorization, there were 34 participants (59,6%) having an adaptive coping mechanism. The categorization of the participant’s coping mechanism is shown in Table 4.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">TABLE 4. PARTICIPANT’S COPING MECHANISMS</span></p>
<table border="1">
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Category</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Score</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Number (n)</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Percentage</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">MaladapTive</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">≤ mean</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">23</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:top;">
<p><span class="font0">40.4%</span></p></td></tr>
<tr><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">Adaptive</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">≥ mean</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">34</span></p></td><td style="vertical-align:middle;">
<p><span class="font0">59.6%</span></p></td></tr>
</table>
<p><span class="font1">The correlation between the academic stress and coping mechanism was done using Pearson Product Moment test with confidence of interval of 95%.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">TABLE 5. CORRELATION BETWEEN THE ACADEMIC STRESS AND COPING MECHANISM</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">Variable &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;N &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Coping Mechanism</span></p>
<p><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;">R &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">p</span><span class="font0" style="font-weight:bold;"> value</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">Academic Stress &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;57 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;-0.517 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;0.001</span></p>
<p><span class="font2">Table 5 shows that the correlation coefficient (r) was -0.517 with a p-value of 0.001 (p&lt;0.05). This result indicated that there was a moderate and negative correlation between academic stress and coping mechanism. Higher level of academic stress correlated with a low level of adaptive coping mechanism</span><span class="font3">.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">IV.</span><span class="font1" style="font-variant:small-caps;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;d</span><span class="font0" style="font-variant:small-caps;">iscussion</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Academic stress can be defined as academic-demand related stress which emerged because of the pressure to get a satisfying score, doing tasks, and the study duration [11]. Internal and external factor is affected academic stress.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The analysis showed that most participants were having a moderate level of stress (63,1%). Some manifestation of moderate stress are cranky, over-reacted to a condition, and getting tired of anxious feeling [12]. Academic stress on this level need to be anticipated. A study done by Khan [13] found that the student’s academic stress affected their academic performances. Reddy, Menon, and Thattil [14] also stated that academic stress which continuously happens can affect psychological health, physical health, and wellness of the student.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Each student needs to choose a coping mechanism to adapt to the stressors [15]. Stuart dan Laraia [7] mentioned that coping mechanism is classified into two types: adaptive coping mechanism (constructive) and maladaptive coping mechanism (destructive). The coping mechanism chosen by each individual is different, depends on the stressors and individual perception [16].</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">This study showed that there was a moderate and negative correlation (r = -0.517) between academic stress and coping mechanism. The negative correlation showed that the high level of academic stress correlated with a low level of coping mechanism (maladaptive coping strategy). This result is parallel with a study conducted by Anelia [17] which showed that a high level of stress correlated with more destructive coping mechanisms.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">A study done by Aris [18] concluded that there was a correlation between stress and coping mechanisms. Moderate stress can affect different methods of coping mechanisms and usually affected maladaptive coping strategies, for example extending their sleeping time and consuming alcohol [19], binge-eating, over-working, crying, denied the problems, and self-isolation[20].</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">This study also found that there were three participants with extremely severe stress and maladaptive coping mechanism. The GPA’s profile of those students was in the lower range of a very good GPA. Donoghue et al. [21] stated that a maladaptive coping strategy can affect academic performances. Study done by Simarmata, Lestari, and Setiawan [22] also found that destructive coping mechanism is correlated with poor academic performances. Rachmah stated that an adaptive coping mechanism helps the students to improve their academic performances.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Some variables possibly affected the student’s coping mechanism which didn’t investigate in detail on the study.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Some variables that correlated with the academical stress and coping mechanisms are social support, financial support, and individual health status.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font1"><a name="bookmark9"></a>V.</span><span class="font1" style="font-variant:small-caps;"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Conclusion</span></h2></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the Pearson Product Moment correlation test, we concluded that there moderate and negative correlations between academic stress and coping mechanism. This result indicated that the higher level of academic stress correlated with the lower level of adaptive coping mechanisms.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">We suggest to use the result of this study as a reference to reduce the academic stress and improving adaptive coping mechanism on the nursing student. The further study needs to find the correlation between other variables which not investigated in detail in this study.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font1" style="font-variant:small-caps;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>Acknowledgment</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">We thank Nursing Study Program Udayana University for giving permission to this research and we thank all of the 3rd year nursing student in the Nursing Study Program, Udayana University as the object of this research.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font1" style="font-variant:small-caps;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>References</span></h2>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">[1] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Indonesia’s Ministry of Education and Culture [internet].Kemdikbud upayakan wajib belajar 12 tahun melalui PIP.2016 [cited October 5<sup>th </sup>2018]. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Available &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;from:</span></p></li></ul>
<p><a href="https://psmk.kemdikbud.go.id/konten/1906/kemdikbud-upayakan-wajib-belajar-12-tahun-melalui-pip"><span class="font0">https://psmk.kemdikbud.go.id/konten/1906/kemdikbud-upayakan-</span></a><span class="font0"></span><a href="https://psmk.kemdikbud.go.id/konten/1906/kemdikbud-upayakan-wajib-belajar-12-tahun-melalui-pip"><span class="font0">wajib-belajar-12-tahun-melalui-pip.</span></a></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">[2] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Barseli, M., &amp;&nbsp;Ifdil, I. Konsep stres akademik siswa. J Konseling dan Pendidikan. 2017; &nbsp;&nbsp;5(3): &nbsp;&nbsp;143-8. Available from</span></p></li></ul>
<p><a href="https://www.researchgate.net/"><span class="font0">https://www.researchgate.net/</span></a></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">[3] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Gupta, S., Chouddhury, S., Das, M., Mondol, A., Pradhan, R. Factors causing stress among students of Medical College in Kolkata, India. Educ Health. 2015 Jan-Apr; 28(1):92-5. doi: 10.4103/1357-6283.161924.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">[4] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Purwati, S. Tingkat stres akademik pada mahasiswa reguler angkatan 2010 fakultas ilmu keperawatan universitas indonesia. [Unpublished Research Paper]. Depok: Indonesia University;2012. Available fro</span><a href="http://lib.ui.ac.id/"><span class="font0">m http://lib.ui.ac.id/</span></a></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">[5] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Sarafino, E. P. Health pssychology, biopsyhosocial interactions 5<sup>th </sup>Ed. New York: John Wiley &amp;&nbsp;Sons, Inc; 2006</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">[6] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Stuart, G. W. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Prinsip dan praktik keperawatan kesehatan jiwa</span><span class="font0">. Singapore: Elsevier; 2016</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">[7] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Stuart, G. W., &amp;&nbsp;Laraia, M. T. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Prinsip dan praktik keperawatan psikiatrik</span><span class="font0">. Jakarta: EGC; 2001</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">[8] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Tagher, C. G., &amp;&nbsp;Robison, E. Critical aspects of stress in a high stakes testing environment: A phenomenographical approach.</span><a href="https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26926217"><span class="font0"> J</span></a><span class="font0"> </span><a href="https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26926217"><span class="font0">Nurs Educ. </span></a><span class="font0">2016 Mar; 55(3):160-3. doi: 10.3928/0148483420160216-07</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">[9] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bedewy, D. &amp;&nbsp;Gabriel, A. Examining perceptions of academic stress and its sources among university students: The perception of academic stress scale.</span><a href="https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28070363"><span class="font0"> Health Psychol Open. </span></a><span class="font0">2015 Jul 30; 2(2). doi: 10.1177/2055102915596714.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">[10] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Kamas, A. M. W. Hubungan antara kejadian bullying dengan mekanisme coping pada mahasiswa penerima program bidikmisi departemen ilmu keperawattan Fakultas Kedokteran Universitas Diponegoro. [Unpublished Research Paper]. Semarang: Diponegoro University; 2017. Available fro</span><a href="http://eprints.undip.ac.id/"><span class="font0">m http://eprints.undip.ac.id</span></a></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">[11] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Desmita. Psikologi perkembangan peserta didik. Bandung: Remaja Rosdakarya; 2010</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">[12] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Psychology Foundation of Australia. Depression anxiety stress scale [internet]. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;2010. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Available &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;from</span></p></li></ul>
<p><a href="http://www2.psy.unsw.edu.au/groups/dass/"><span class="font0">http://www2.psy.unsw.edu.au/groups/dass/</span></a></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">[13] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Khan, M. J. Effect of perceived academic stress on students’ performance. FWU Journal of Social Sciences. 2013; 7(2): 146-151. Available from</span><a href="https://www.researchgate.net/"><span class="font0"> https://www.researchgate.net/</span></a></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">[14] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Reddy K. J., Menon K. R., Thattil A. Academic stress and its sources among university students. Biomed Pharmacol J. 2018 Mar; 11 (1): 531-37. doi:</span><a href="http://dx.doi.org/10.13005/bpj/1404"><span class="font0"> 10.13005/bpj/1404</span></a></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">[15] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Walinga, J. </span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">Introduction to Psychology 1<sup>st</sup> Canadian Edition (Stres, health, and coping).</span><span class="font0"> Canada: Creative Commons Attribution NonCommercial ShareAlike; 2014</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">[16] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Baqutayan, S. M. S. Stress and Coping Mechanisms: A Historical Overview. Mediterranean Journal of Social Sciences. 2015 Mar; 6 (2): 479-88. doi: 10.5901/mjss.2015.v6n2s1p479</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">[17] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Anelia, N. Hubungan tingkat stres dengan mekanisme koping pada mahasiswa reguler Program Profesi Ners FIK UI Tahun Akademik 2011/2012. [Unpublished Research Paper]. Jakarta: Universitas Indonesia; 2012. Available from</span><a href="http://lib.ui.ac.id/"><span class="font0"> http://lib.ui.ac.id/</span></a></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">[18] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aris, Y. Hubungan tingkat stres dengan strategi koping pada mahasiswa keperawatan universitas andalas padang tahun 2015. [Unpublished Research Paper]. Padang: Universitas Andalas; 2015 Available from</span><a href="https://www.academia.edu/"><span class="font0"> https://www.academia.edu/</span></a></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">[19] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</span><a href="https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Metzger%20IW%5bAuthor%5d&amp;cauthor=true&amp;cauthor_uid=28708021"><span class="font0">Metzger, </span></a><span class="font0">I. W.</span><a href="https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Blevins%20C%5bAuthor%5d&amp;cauthor=true&amp;cauthor_uid=28708021"><span class="font0">, Blevins, </span></a><span class="font0">C.,</span><a href="https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Calhoun%20CD%5bAuthor%5d&amp;cauthor=true&amp;cauthor_uid=28708021"><span class="font0"> Calhoun, </span></a><span class="font0">C. D.</span><a href="https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Ritchwood%20TD%5bAuthor%5d&amp;cauthor=true&amp;cauthor_uid=28708021"><span class="font0">, Ritchwood, </span></a><span class="font0">T. D., </span><a href="https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Gilmore%20AK%5bAuthor%5d&amp;cauthor=true&amp;cauthor_uid=28708021"><span class="font0">Gilmore, </span></a><span class="font0">A. K.,</span><a href="https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Stewart%20R%5bAuthor%5d&amp;cauthor=true&amp;cauthor_uid=28708021"><span class="font0"> Stewart, </span></a><span class="font0">S.,</span><a href="https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Bountress%20KE%5bAuthor%5d&amp;cauthor=true&amp;cauthor_uid=28708021"><span class="font0"> Bountress, </span></a><span class="font0">K. E. An examination of the impact of maladaptive coping on the association between stresor type and alcohol use in college.</span><a href="https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28708021"><span class="font0"> J Am Coll Health. </span></a><span class="font0">2017 Nov-Dec; 65(8):534-41. doi: 10.1080/07448481.2017.1351445</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">[20] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Mesarini, B. A., Astuti, V. W. Stres dan mekanisme koping terhadap gangguan siklus menstruasi pada remaja putri. Jurnal STIKES. 2013; 6 (1): 31-42. Available fro</span><a href="http://puslit2.petra.ac.id/"><span class="font0">m http://puslit2.petra.ac.id/</span></a></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">[21] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Donoghue, C., Angela, A., David, B., Gabriela, R., &amp;&nbsp;Ian, C. (2014). Coping with verbal and social bullying in middle school. International Journal of Emotional Education</span><span class="font0" style="font-style:italic;">.</span><span class="font0"> 2014 Nov; 6 (2): 4053. ISSN: 2073- 7629</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font0">[22] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Simarmata, G. E., Lestari, D. R., Setiawan, H. Mekanisme koping dengan prestasi belajar mahasiswa sistem pembelajaran blok angkatan 2013. Jurnal Keperawatan dan Kesehatan. 2013; 3(1): 2232.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font0">DOI:</span><a href="http://dx.doi.org/10.20527/dk.v3i1.1703"><span class="font0"> 10.20527/dk.v3i1.1703</span></a></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font0">[23] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Rachmah, D. N. Hubungan self-efficacy, coping stres, dan prestasi akademik. Jurnal Ecopsy. 2013; 1(1): 6-11. ISSN: 2354-7634</span></p></li></ul>