---
layout: full_article
title: "Temporal Deictic Expressions in the Song Lyrics of Pale Waves’ My Mind Makes Noises Album"
author: "Ida Ayu Rai Nayma Mahadewi, Ni Luh Sutjiati Beratha, Sang Ayu Isnu Maharani"
categories: stilistika
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/stilistika/full-85782 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/stilistika/id-85782"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/stilistika/full-85782"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font6" style="font-weight:bold;">STILISTIKA</span></p>
<p><span class="font5" style="font-style:italic;text-decoration:underline;">Journal of Indonesian Language and Literature</span></p>
<p><span class="font5">e-ISSN daring: 2528-4940</span></p>
<p><span class="font5" style="text-decoration:underline;">Vol. 02, No.02: April 2023, 143-150</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>TEMPORAL DEICTIC EXPRESSIONS IN THE SONG LYRICS OF PALE WAVES’ </span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">MY MIND MAKES NOISES</span><span class="font4" style="font-weight:bold;"> ALBUM</span></h1>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Ida Ayu Rai Nayma Mahadewi <sup>1*</sup>, Luh Sutjiati Beratha <sup>2</sup>, dan Sang Ayu Isnu Maharani <sup>3 </sup></span><span class="font2">Universitas Udayana,</span></p>
<p><span class="font2"><sup>*)</sup> surel korespondensi:</span><a href="mailto:nayhadde@gmail.com"><span class="font2"> </span><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;">nayhadde@gmail.com</span></a><span class="font1" style="text-decoration:underline;"> </span><span class="font2">doi:</span><a href="https://doi.org/10.24843/STIL.2023.v02.i02.p14"><span class="font2"> </span><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://doi.org/10.24843/STIL.2023.v02.i02.p14</span></a><span class="font2" style="text-decoration:underline;"> </span><span class="font2">Artikel dikirim: 22 April 2022; diterima: 22 Mei 2022</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>TEMPORAL DEICTIC EXPRESSIONS IN THE SONG LYRICS OF PALE WAVES’ </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">MY MIND MAKES NOISES</span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"> ALBUM</span></h2>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstract. </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Temporal Deictic Expressions in the Song Lyrics of Pale Waves’ My Mind Makes NoisesAlbum</span><span class="font2"> is the title of this article. This article focused on temporal deictic expressions in </span><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">My Mind Makes</span><span class="font2"> Noises song lyrics that have official music videos. This article had two aims: first, to identify the temporal deictic expressions in the album's song lyrics; and second, to explain and analyze the deictic usages of the album's temporal deictic expressions. This article used a qualitative method and content analysis technique to analyze the data, with Huang's pragmatics theory as the grand theory and Halliday's context of situation theory as the supporting theory. The data for this article was gathered through the use of documentation and note-taking method and technique. This article used an informal method and descriptive technique to present the analysis, which means the results were presented in the form of descriptive words and sentences. There were six temporal deictic expressions analyzed in this article, which were then categorized into three categories based on the time of the event using pragmatics method, the context of the situation, and then the deictic usage of each temporal deictic expression. This article demonstrated that gestural deictic usage offers a clearer identification of the time of the event in temporal deictic expression, as well as an easier understanding of the context of situation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font2" style="font-style:italic;">Keywords: contect of situation; deictic usages, song lyrics, temporal deixis</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>INTRODUCTION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">According to Davis (1953), the act of sharing information from a speaker to a listener in order to create mutual comprehension is known as communication. It is fundamental for the listener to comprehend what the speaker mean when communicating.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Pragmatics is the study of comprehending what the speaker mean by identifying the context of the utterance (Yule, 2017). It is possible for the listener to derive additional meanings from what the speaker intended to communicate, however, this is reliant on the listener's ability to comprehend the use of language. As mentioned by Huang (2014), language in use is a spoken or written utterance that is used to successfully communicate among each individual in social situations. To</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">avoid misunderstandings between the speaker and the listener, it is important to use language correctly, and the listener must attempt to avoid misinterpretation by comprehending the context of situation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Halliday (2004) states that Context of situation is the aspects of context that are relevant to the language used to transmit utterances. It is impossible to fully comprehend what the speaker has said or written without monitoring the words before and after the temporal deictic expression. Therefore, the focus of this article is on the context of situation in deixis, particularly in temporal deictic expressions.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Deixis is a linguistic concept that refers to the people involved in an utterance, along with the place and the time of the event (Yang, 2011). What the speaker mean in an utterance will be well understood if the listener is aware of who, where, and when the utterance is uttered. This makes deixis an ideal approach for implementing the aims of this article, which are about temporal deictic expression.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Temporal deixis in English song lyrics is an intriguing topic due to the fact that time is an aspect in English grammar that affects tenses. It can be found in practically every spoken and written English utterance, including in entertainment industries such as films, newspapers, novels, and songs.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">According to Piragasam, et.al. (2013), Song is a type of art in which the words are sung with melodies and instrumentals. Song is more than just an art form, it also provides entertainments and inspirations for the listeners. As a result, the datum for this article are song lyrics from an album.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The data for this study is song lyrics from Pale Waves' album </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">My Mind Makes Noises</span><span class="font3"> which has official music videos. This album received a five-star rating from Dork Magazine and a four-star rating from NME, a British website (New Musical Express). This album has also earned over 80 million plays on Spotify, an online music streaming site, and that number is expected to rise as time goes on. Only six of the album's fourteen songs have official music videos, only song lyrics with official music videos were used as data for this study, as official music videos are indeed the key in solving the second problem of the study, which needs monitoring of the speaker's physical demonstration.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The data for this article was collected by using the observation method and note-taking technique, then qualitative method and content analysis technique were used to analyze the data, and lastly the data analysis was presented by using the informal method and descriptive technique, which means the analysis was described in the form of words.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The focus of this article is on the analysis of temporal deictic expressions in </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">My Mind Makes Noises</span><span class="font3"> album’s song lyrics. Analyzing song lyrics is interesting because listening to music is a common entertaining activity in humans’ lives. Additionally, the song lyrics from this album contain numerous temporal deictic expressions. In reality, some listeners of this album, specifically those who are inexperienced with hearing British accents, may have difficulty identifying and interpreting the temporal deictic expressions in this English album. As an outcome, it's both interesting and useful to analyze temporal deictic expressions and deictic usages in this album’s song lyrics.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>RESULT AND DISCUSSION</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">This article identifies the first temporal deictic expression in each of the song lyrics from </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">My Mind Makes Noises</span><span class="font3"> album that have official music videos, then divides them into three categories based on the time of the event, using pragmatics theory by Huang (2014) as the grand theory and context of situation theory by Halliday (2004) as the supporting theory. This article additionally examines the deictic usage of each temporal deictic expression by using Huang's (2014) deictic usages categories.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">[1]</span><span class="font3"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Felt like I could </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">finally </span><span class="font3">see in colour</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The expression &quot;Finally&quot; comes from the song </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Eighteen</span><span class="font3"> which is the first temporal deictic expression in the song </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Eighteen</span><span class="font3"> To precisely determine the time of the event of the temporal deictic expression &quot;Finally&quot; based on Huang's theory, it is necessary to first determine the context of situation using Halliday's theory, which includes field, tenor, and mode. To determine the field, it is needed to monitor the words before and after the temporal deictic expression &quot;Finally,&quot; which is a moment when the speaker feels that a person has altered her perspective of how to see the world. To discover the tenor, it is needed to look at the people engaged in this utterance, the speaker of this utterance is Heather Baron-Gracie, the band's lead singer, and the listener of this utterance is anyone who listens to the song </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Eighteen</span><span class="font3"> as a result, the speaker and the listener are not personally acquainted, implying that they have no personal relationship. To reveal the mode, it is needed to listen to the song </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Eighteen </span><span class="font3">which indicates that this is a spoken utterance. Furthermore, the utterance “Felt like I could finally see in colour” contains one dominant past tense verb, which is &quot;Felt.&quot; As a result of the context of situation and the verb form of this utterance, the temporal deictic expression &quot;Finally&quot; can be inferred to the past time of the event.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The temporal deictic expression “Finally” has no speaker’s physical demonstration such as hand gesture, eye contact, and body language when uttered by</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">the speaker. Therefore, the first temporal deictic expression in the song </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Eighteen</span><span class="font3"> which is “Finally,” has a symbolic deictic usage.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">[2]</span><span class="font3"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;I wanna feel something different </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">for once</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The expression “For once” comes from the song </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">There’s a Honey</span><span class="font3"> which is the first temporal deictic expression in the song </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">There’s a Honey</span><span class="font3"> To precisely determine the time of the event of the temporal deictic expression “For once” based on Huang's theory, it is necessary to first determine the context of situation using Halliday's theory, which includes field, tenor, and mode. To determine the field, it is needed to monitor the words before and after the temporal deictic expression &quot;For once,&quot; which is a moment when the speaker wishes to experience something that she hasn't experienced in her life. To discover the tenor, it is needed to look at the people engaged in this utterance, the speaker of this utterance is Heather Baron-Gracie, the band's lead singer, and the listener of this utterance is anyone who listens to the song &quot;There’s a Honey,&quot; as a result, the speaker and the listener are not personally acquainted, implying that they have no personal relationship. To reveal the mode, it is needed to listen to the song </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">There’s a Honey</span><span class="font3"> which indicates that this is a spoken utterance. Furthermore, the utterance “I wanna feel something different for once” contains two dominant present tense verbs, which are &quot;Feel,&quot; and “Wanna” which is a shortened informal word from “Want to.” As a result of the context of situation and the verb forms of this utterance, the temporal deictic expression &quot;For once&quot; can be inferred to the present time of the event.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The temporal deictic expression “For once” has no speaker’s physical demonstration such as hand gesture, eye contact, and body language when uttered by the speaker. Therefore, the first temporal deictic expression in the song “There’s a Honey,” which is “For once,” has a symbolic deictic usage.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">[3]</span><span class="font3"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Why do I stare so much at my body?</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">I’m falling, I’m crawling on the floor </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">at night</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The expression “At night” comes from the song </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Noises</span><span class="font3"> which is the first temporal deictic expression in the song </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Noises</span><span class="font3">. To precisely determine the time of the event of the temporal deictic expression “At night” based on Huang's theory, it is necessary to first determine the context of situation using Halliday's theory, which includes field, tenor, and mode. To determine the field, it is needed to monitor the words before and after the temporal deictic expression &quot;At night,&quot; which is a moment when the speaker is self-conscious about her appearance. To discover the tenor, it is needed to look at the people engaged in this utterance, the speaker of this utterance is Heather Baron-Gracie, the band's lead singer, and the listener of this utterance is</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">anyone who listens to the song </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Noises</span><span class="font3"> as a result, the speaker and the listener are not personally acquainted, implying that they have no personal relationship. To reveal the mode, it is needed to listen to the song </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Noises</span><span class="font3"> which indicates that this is a spoken utterance. Furthermore, the utterance “Why do I stare so much at my body? I’m falling, I’m crawling on the floor at night” contains three dominant present tense verbs, which are &quot;Stare,&quot; “Falling,” and “Crawling.” As a result of the context of situation and the verb forms of this utterance, the temporal deictic expression &quot;At night&quot; can be inferred to the present time of the event.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The temporal deictic expression &quot;At night&quot; has the speaker’s body language physical demonstration when uttered by the speaker. It is noticeable that she tosses her body with little energy, as if she's sorrowful and weary, while uttering the temporal deictic expression &quot;At night.&quot; Therefore, the first temporal deictic expression in the song </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Noises</span><span class="font3"> which is “At night,” has a gestural deictic usage.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">[4]</span><span class="font3"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;I </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">never </span><span class="font3">thought that we would end like this</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The expression “Never” comes from the song </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">One More Time</span><span class="font3"> which is the first temporal deictic expression in the song </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">One More Time</span><span class="font3">. To precisely determine the time of the event of the temporal deictic expression “Never” based on Huang's theory, it is necessary to first determine the context of situation using Halliday's theory, which includes field, tenor, and mode. To determine the field, it is needed to monitor the words before and after the temporal deictic expression “Never,” which is a moment when the speaker doubts the probability of the absence of her former partner. To discover the tenor, it is needed to look at the people engaged in this utterance, the speaker of this utterance is Heather Baron-Gracie, the band's lead singer, and the listener of this utterance is anyone who listens to the song </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">One More Time</span><span class="font3"> as a result, the speaker and the listener are not personally acquainted, implying that they have no personal relationship. To reveal the mode, it is needed to listen to the song </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">One More Time</span><span class="font3"> which indicates that this is a spoken utterance. Furthermore, the utterance “I never thought we would end like this” contains two dominant past tense verbs, which are &quot;Thought&quot; and “Would.” As a result of the context of situation and the verb forms of this utterance, the temporal deictic expression &quot;Never&quot; can be inferred to the past time of the event.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The temporal deictic expression “Never” has no speaker’s physical demonstration such as hand gesture, eye contact, and body language when uttered by the speaker. Therefore, the first temporal deictic expression in the song </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">One More Time </span><span class="font3">which is “Never,” has a symbolic deictic usage.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">[5]</span><span class="font3"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;But </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">in the morning</span><span class="font3">, it might just change</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The expression “In the morning” comes from the song </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Television Romance</span><span class="font3"> which is the first temporal deictic expression in the song </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Television Romance</span><span class="font3">. To precisely determine the time of the event of the temporal deictic expression “In the morning” based on Huang's theory, it is necessary to first determine the context of situation using Halliday's theory, which includes field, tenor, and mode. To determine the field, it is needed to monitor the words before and after the temporal deictic expression “In the morning,” which is a moment when there is a probability that the speaker may reconsider her decision. To discover the tenor, it is needed to look at the people engaged in this utterance, the speaker of this utterance is Heather Baron-Gracie, the band's lead singer, and the listener of this utterance is anyone who listens to the song </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Television Romance</span><span class="font3"> as a result, the speaker and the listener are not personally acquainted, implying that they have no personal relationship. To reveal the mode, it is needed to listen to the song </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Television Romance</span><span class="font3"> which indicates that this is a spoken utterance. Furthermore, the utterance “But in the morning, it might just change” contains one dominant future tense verb, which is &quot;Might.” As a result of the context of situation and the verb form of this utterance, the temporal deictic expression “In the morning” can be inferred to the future time of the event.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The temporal deictic expression “In the morning” has no speaker’s physical demonstration such as hand gesture, eye contact, and body language when uttered by the speaker. Therefore, the first temporal deictic expression in the song “Television Romance,” which is “In the morning,” has a symbolic deictic usage.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">[6]</span><span class="font3"> &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Well you’re the fashion </span><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;text-decoration:underline;">right now</span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">,</span><span class="font3"> the fashion right</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font3">The expression “Right now” comes from the song </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Kiss</span><span class="font3"> which is the first temporal deictic expression in the song </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Kiss</span><span class="font3"> To precisely determine the time of the event of the temporal deictic expression “Right now” based on Huang's theory, it is necessary to first determine the context of situation using Halliday's theory, which includes field, tenor, and mode. To determine the field, it is needed to monitor the words before and after the temporal deictic expression “Right now,” which is a moment when the speaker's attention is drawn to the person that she likes. To discover the tenor, it is needed to look at the people engaged in this utterance, the speaker of this utterance is Heather Baron-Gracie, the band's lead singer, and the listener of this utterance is anyone who listens to the song </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Kiss</span><span class="font3"> as a result, the speaker and the listener are not personally acquainted, implying that they have no personal relationship. To reveal the mode, it is needed to listen to the song </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Kiss</span><span class="font3"> which indicates that this is a spoken utterance. As a result of the context of situation in the utterance “Well you’re</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">the fashion right now, the fashion right,” the temporal deictic expression “Right now” can be inferred to the present time of the event.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">The temporal deictic expression “Right now” has no speaker’s physical demonstration such as hand gesture, eye contact, and body language when uttered by the speaker. Therefore, the first temporal deictic expression in the song </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Kiss </span><span class="font3">which is “Right now,” has a symbolic deictic usage.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>CONCLUSIONS</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">This article discovered six temporal deictic expressions in the first temporal deictic expression of each song from </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">My Mind Makes Noises</span><span class="font3"> album which has an official music video. The first temporal deictic expression in the song </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Eighteen</span><span class="font3"> is “Finally,” the first temporal deictic expression in the song </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">There’s a Honey</span><span class="font3"> is “For once,” the first temporal deictic expression in the song </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Noises</span><span class="font3"> is “At night,” the first temporal deictic expression in the song </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">One More Time</span><span class="font3"> is “Never,” the first temporal deictic expression in the song </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Television Romance</span><span class="font3"> is “In the morning,” and the first temporal deictic expression in the song </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Kiss</span><span class="font3"> is “Right now.” This means all of the songs in </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">My Mind Makes Noises</span><span class="font3"> album have at least one temporal deictic expression.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">This article also analyzed the deictic usage of the first temporal deictic expression in each song of </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">My Mind Makes Noises</span><span class="font3"> album. There is only one temporal deictic expression that has gestural deictic usage, which is “At night.” As for the symbolic deictic usage, there are five temporal deictic expressions that have symbolic deictic usages, which are: “Finally,” “For once,” “Never,” “In the morning,” and “Right now.”</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark10"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark11"></a>REFERENCES</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3">Davis, K. 1953. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Management Communication and the Grapevine</span><span class="font3">. Boston: Harvard Business Review.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Doran, C., &amp;&nbsp;Baron-Gracie, H. 2018. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">My Mind Makes Noises</span><span class="font3"> Album Song Lyrics [Internet]. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Dirty &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Hit, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;England. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Available &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;from:</span></p>
<p><a href="https://genius.com/album/Pale-waves/My-mind-makes-noises"><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://genius.com/album/Pale-waves/My-mind-makes-noises</span><span class="font3"> </span></a><span class="font3">[Accessed 23 February 2022].</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Halliday, M.A.K. 2004. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">An Introduction to Functional Grammar</span><span class="font3">. London: Edward Arnold.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Huang, Y. 2014. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Pragmatics. Second Edition</span><span class="font3">. New York: Oxford University Press.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Piragasam, G.A., Majid, R.A., &amp;&nbsp;Jelas, Z.M. 2013. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Music Appreciation and Selfactualization of Gifted Students</span><span class="font3">. Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences. No.90, October, pp124-132.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Waves, P. 2018. My </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Mind Makes Noises</span><span class="font3"> Album Official Video [Internet]. Dirty Hit, England. Available from:</span><a href="https://www.youtube.com/c/PaleWaves/featured"><span class="font3"> </span><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;">https://www.youtube.com/c/PaleWaves/featured</span></a><span class="font3" style="text-decoration:underline;"> </span><span class="font3">[Accessed 23 February 2022].</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Yang, Y. 2011. A </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">Cognitive Interpretation of Discourse Deixis</span><span class="font3">. Theory and Practice in Language Studies. No.2, February, pp128-135.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3">Yule, G. 2017. </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">The Study of Language</span><span class="font3">. Sixth Edition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark12"></a><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark13"></a>AUTHOR PROFILE</span></h2>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Ida Ayu Rai Nayma Mahadewi </span><span class="font3">is one of the students of English Department in Udayana University from 2018 batch.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Prof. Dr. Ni Luh Sutjiati Beratha, M.A. </span><span class="font3">is a semantics professor in English Department, Faculty of Humanities, Udayana University who graduated from several universities in Australia. She completed her master degree at the Department of Linguistics, Monash University, Melbourne, Australia in 1989, and her Ph.D degree was achieved from the Australian National University (ANU) Canberra, Australia in 1992. She was the Dean of the Faculty of Humanities in Udayana University from 2015 until 2019.</span></p>
<p><span class="font3" style="font-weight:bold;">Sang Ayu Isnu Maharani, S.S. M.A. </span><span class="font3">is one of the lecturers in English Department, Faculty of Humanities, Udayana University. She finished years of academic degrees from undergraduate until post graduate at the same institution where she works at. Her interests are in sociolinguistic and translation study. She has translated 3 books, one of them is titled </span><span class="font3" style="font-style:italic;">The Branding of Gianyar as the Heritage City</span><span class="font3">.</span></p>
<p><span class="font0">150</span></p>