---
layout: full_article
title: "External and Internal Conflicts of the Main Character in the Movie Clouds"
author: "Ni Kadek Leoni"
categories: ujossh
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ujossh/full-74474 
citation_abstract_html_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ujossh/id-74474"
citation_pdf_url: "https://jurnal.harianregional.com/ujossh/full-74474"  
comments: true
---

<p><span class="font0">Udayana Journal of Social Sciences and Humanities, Vol. 7 No. 2, September 2023</span></p><a name="caption1"></a>
<h1><a name="bookmark0"></a><span class="font2" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark1"></a>External and Internal Conflicts of the Main Character in the Movie Clouds</span></h1>
<p><span class="font1">Ni Kadek Leoni<sup>1</sup>, I Made Suastra<sup>2</sup>, Ni Luh Putu Krisnawati<sup>3</sup></span></p>
<p><span class="font1"><sup>[1]</sup>English Department, Faculty of Humanities, Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Denpasar, Bali</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Email: </span><a href="mailto:leonikadek02@gmail.com"><span class="font1">leonikadek02@gmail.com</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1"><sup>[2]</sup>English Department, Faculty of Humanities, Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Denpasar, Bali</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Email: </span><a href="mailto:madesuastra@yahoo.co.id"><span class="font1">madesuastra@yahoo.co.id</span></a></p>
<p><span class="font1"><sup>[3]</sup>English Department, Faculty of Humanities, Udayana University</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Denpasar, Bali</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;">Abstract : </span><span class="font1">This study is entitled External and Internal Conflict of the Main Character in the Movie Clouds. The aim is to analyze the kinds of conflict and to find out the strategies of main character to manage the conflict in the movie Clouds. The documentation method also the technique used to collect the data in this study note-taking technique and qualitative descriptive method was used as a method and technique of analyzing data based on the theory by Kenney and the theory by Deetz and Stevenson . The results show two types of conflict found in Clouds movie: External and Internal Conflict. The most appear conflict in conversation is external conflict than internal conflict. The most applied conflict management shows in the movie are avoidance, compromise, and pacification because that is relevant resolution conflict to the topic in conversation.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Keywords: Main Character, Conflict, Movie.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">I. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;INTRODUCTION</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">People think literary works are arts. That assumption is also not wrong. Literature is 'creative' or 'imaginative' writing, does imply that history, philosophy and natural science are uncreative and unimaginative (Eagleton, 1996:2). As we know, there are four kinds of literature that has been mentioned above, certainly the most popular is the movie. Movie is something that many people like. Nowadays, the types of movies are varied and always present interesting movie shows every day. Moreover, the most important thing is how the main character executes the narrative plot from the beginning to the end of the story. The plot that makes it more</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">interesting is the conflict in it. The conflict was created to give the impression of curiosity to the audience who witnessed it.There are two types of conflict namely external and internal conflict. After the appearance of the conflict, the character try to resolve the conflict. One of the films that had interesting conflicts is Clouds movie. The movie entitled Clouds was chosen as the data source of this study because of the simple storyline packaged in the right way. The special thing that makes this movie unique is many moral messages can motivate persistence and the way the character sees the world. Through this study, the society is expected to comprehend the</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">types of conflict as well as the management of it which can be applied in daily basis.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">II. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;RESEARCH METHOD</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">This part is divided into four that specifically discusses about data source, method and technique of collecting data, method and technique of analyzing data, and method and technique of presenting data analysis.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark2"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark3"></a>Data Source</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">The primary data of this study is movie and was taken from the Clouds (2020) and the secondary data is script. Clouds is American musical drama directed and produced by Justin Baldoni and Kara Holden. Meanwhile, the script is also written by Kara Holden. Clouds was released on Disney+ on October 16, 2020. The genre of this movie is a romantic drama. This movie was chosen due to a complex plot with interesting conflicts that mainly tell about achieving the goal under certain bad condition which is very inspirational to be researched and can be the example of the society on how to cope with similar condition in real life.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark4"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark5"></a>Method and Technique of Collecting Data</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">The data was collected using the documentation method also the technique used to collect the data in this study notetaking technique. The first steps were including downloading the </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Clouds</span><span class="font1"> movie and its script from the internet. Secondly listening to dialogue and reading the movie script. Third, the lines that provided conflict was highlighted and written down. Lastly, finding out the resolution of conflict in the </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Clouds</span><span class="font1"> movie.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark6"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark7"></a>Methode and Technique of Analyzing Data</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">Then for the data analysis, this study will be used a qualitative descriptive methode. According to the theory of literature</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">proposed by Kenney (1966) and Deetz and Stevenson (1986). This method is applied because it fits with the nature of this study where the data were analyzed based on the theories applied.The technique that will be applied in analyzing data as follows:</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">a. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The data were divided into two parts</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">which were the ones about kinds of conflict and the ones about the management conflict</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">b. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Listing the data about kinds of</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">conflict based on the theory of Kenney (1966) and management conflict based on the theory of Deetz and Stevenson (1986)</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">c. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Read repeatedly in order to</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">understanding the conflict</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">d. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Analyzing the data using the theory</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">of Kenney (1966) and Deetz and Stevenson (1986)</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark8"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark9"></a>Method and Technique of Presenting</span><br><br><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark10"></a>Data Analysis</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">Informal method is the method that explains the data through sentences. The data is presented first, then the analysis is presented below the data. Below is the model analysis</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Sammy : That’s nice, but you are my best friend, so you are morally obligated to say nice things to me. Everybody else out there is not my best friend.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Zach : If everyone else doesn’t like it, then they’re idiots. Just don’t screw it up, all right ?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Sammy : Ha, that’s not funny. God, this stage fright thing is so stupid.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Zach : It’s not stupid. Look, if you’re not ready to go, then I will.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The first conflict becomes between Zach and Sammy at school. She wasn't confident of performing on stage at his school event. The conflict happen when Sammy needed support of his best friend Zach, but he prioritizes his girlfriend named Amy who is performing dance on stage. Sammy was very disappointed and upset. According to the following quotation </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">&quot;That’s nice, but you are my best friend, so you are morally obligated to say nice things to me. Everybody else out there is not my best friend”.</span><span class="font1"> from Sammy.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the theory from Kenney, the following quotation above included external conflict man vs man. From the data above, Zach said that </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“It’s not stupid. Look, if you’re not ready to go, then I will”.</span><span class="font1"> That means Zach's trying to comfort Sammy in the middle of his nervousness. In other words, Zach tries to perform on stage to replace Sammy’s when Sammy feels unconfident and also to make his feel better.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">According to theory from Deetz and Stevenson, the resolution of this conflict was giving by Zach. Following the quotation </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“It’s not stupid. Look, if you’re not ready to go, then I will”.</span><span class="font1"> Zach tries to replace Sammy’s role on stage. Sammy feels better with that, and didn’t imagined Zach to do that. Compromise is an approach with a desire to keep everyone a little happy, perhaps not as happy as they would have liked, but happier than they would have been they lose. It works to make sure no one is unhappy than others rather than to assure happiness. Zach tried to compromise with Sammy to not being mad and feels unfair for the way he treats. Sammy feels better because Zach wanted to replace his role to performing on stage.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">III. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;RESULTS AND DISCUSSION</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">This chapter presents data analysis using of two theories, namely theory proposed by Kenney (1996), and theory by Deetz &amp;&nbsp;Stevenson (1986). Continued by the analysis of external and internal conflict and also the conflict solution. The presentation of the analysis supported by the movie script.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark11"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark12"></a>Types of Conflicts</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">There are two types of conflict that can be analyzed which internal and external conflicts, the explanation of those types as subsection below:</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark13"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark14"></a>External Conflict</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">External conflict are shown through action such as fight, argument, and physical struggle (Kenney 1966:5). In an external conflict, a character may be struggling against another character, the natural world, or society. In an external conflict, a character may be struggling against another character, the natural world, or society.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Data 1</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">(02:37 - 03:10)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Sammy : That’s nice, but you are my best friend, so you are morally obligated to say nice things to me. Everybody else out there is not my best friend.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Zach : If everyone else doesn’t like it, then they’re idiots. Just don’t screw it up, all right ?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Sammy : Ha, that’s not funny. God, this stage fright thing is so stupid.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Zach : It’s not stupid. Look, if you’re not ready to go, then I will.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The conflict happen when Sammy needed support of his best friend Zach, but he prioritizes his girlfriend named Amy who is performing dance on stage. Sammy was very disappointed and upset. According to the following quotation </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">&quot;That’s nice, but</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">you are my best friend, so you are morally obligated to say nice things to me. Everybody else out there is not my best friend”.</span><span class="font1"> from Sammy. Based on the theory from Kenney, the following quotation above included external conflict man vs man. It is usually occurs when one character is struggling against another character in the story. In the other words, it can be born from moral, social differences, and emotional, verbal physical conflict. In this case, one character that is Sammy has an emotional conflict with another character that is Zach. From the data above, Zach said that </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“It’s not stupid. Look, if you’re not ready to go, then I will”.</span><span class="font1"> According to theory from Deetz and Stevenson, the resolution of this conflict was giving by Zach. Following the quotation </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“It’s not stupid. Look, if you’re not ready to go, then I will”.</span><span class="font1"> Zach tries to replace Sammy’s role on stage. Sammy feels better with that, and didn’t imagined Zach to do that. Compromise is an approach with a desire to keep everyone a little happy, perhaps not as happy as they would have liked, but happier than they would have been they lose.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Data 2</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">(13:41 - 13:50)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Zach : Can we just go after the picnic ?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Mom : No. Absolutely not.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Zach : No! Please, please, please ?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Mom : We’re not having an argument about this.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Zach : It’s not that serious. I’m fine. I’m seriously okay.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Mom : We’re going to the hospital. Stop!</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Zach : Allright. Now we’re going to the hospital.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The external conflict in this scene happened when Zach argued with his mother. Following the quotation </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“We’re not having an argument about this. We’re going to the hospital. Stop!”</span><span class="font1"> Zach's mother required him to come to the hospital for his health. Zach feels he's still good enough with his condition to come see Amy. Zach tries to get his mother to let him go, but his mother still prioritized Zach's health first. According to the theory Deetz and Stevenson, the conflict between Zach and his mom belong to Compromise resolution of conflict. Following the quotation </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“Allright. We’re going to the hospital</span><span class="font1">”. Although Zach continues to argued with his mother to wanted to keep coming with his condition that is not good enough. In the end, Zach obeys his mother to checked his health to the hospital. Zach feels sad because his planned to go on a picnic with Amy should be canceled. On the other hand, Zach does not want to make his mother sad for ignoring his advice.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Data 3</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">(22:10 - 23:05)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Amy : Zach, Zach, Zach. Hey. Um, is everything okay ?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Zach : I’m okay.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Amy : Well, I’m really sorry about your emergency surgery. I’m sure that was, like, really scary. It’s just the Zach Sobiech I know wouldn’t leave a girl stranded at the park and never talk to her again.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Zach : I’m terminal.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The conflict began when Zach starts returning to school after his surgery. before that he had canceled his appointment to Amy to meet in the park. Then entering the school Zach tries to avoid Amy. She feels very confused and upset. Why Zach treats</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">him like that even in the absence of a reasonable explanation. Amy's looking for Zach everywhere because she doesn't take it. In the following quotation </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“Well, I’m really sorry about your emergency surgery. I’m sure that was, like, really scary. It’s just the Zach Sobiech I know wouldn’t leave a girl stranded at the park and never talk to her again</span><span class="font1">”. From Amy. Based on the data above, in this situation included to external conflict. External conflict man vs man. It is usually occurs when one character is struggling against another character in the story. In the other words, it can be born from moral, social differences, and emotional, verbal physical conflict. In this case, one character that is Amy has an emotional conflict with another character that is Zach.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">According to the theory of Deetz and Stevenson, the resolution in this conflict is Avoidance. Avoidance is a common and passive way to deal with the conflict. Conflict avoidance can take place by avoiding context in which conflict might arise, by giving in to the other in a conflict situation or by agreeing to put the conflict to another time and place. Looking the quotation “ </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">I’m terminal”</span><span class="font1">. From Zach. At the end when Amy wanted to leaved Zach, He says he is terminal.</span></p>
<h2><a name="bookmark15"></a><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;"><a name="bookmark16"></a>Internal Conflict</span></h2>
<p><span class="font1">Internal conflict mostly struggle that takes place in the character’s mind, because of the dual desire or different wishes. It is makes the characters have to deal with their own emotions and mind (Kenney 1966:5). In internal conflict, a character may have decide between right and wrong or between two solutions to a problem.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Data 9</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">(14:25 - 14:42)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Zach : It can’t be that big of a deal. I feel fine.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Doctor : Your lung is leaking air and putting pressure on your heart. If we don’t relieve it right away, you could go into respiratory failure or cardiac arrest.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Zach &nbsp;&nbsp;: Mom?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Mom &nbsp;&nbsp;: Okay, babe, it’s gonna be okay.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">They know what they’re doing.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Zach &nbsp;&nbsp;: Wait, Mom!</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the theory Kenney (1966) internal conflict is struggle that takes place in the character’s mind, because of the dual desire or different wishes. Sometimes, the characters have to deal with their own emotions and mind. This type of conflict is later called as man versus self. Looking the quotation above </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“It can’t be that big of a deal. I feel fine”.</span><span class="font1"> Zach assures his mother that his health is not as serious as his mother imagined. He feels really fine and good enough to do activities. He didn't want her mother to worry and feel anxious. According to the theory Deetz and Stevenson, the resolution in this situation belong to Compromise. Zach's mother entrusted everything to the doctor. although Zach insists on saying he is fine in fact the disease he suffered severely. He was immediately treated by the doctor and performed the surgery until he ended up in a coma for a long time. The doctor diagnosed his life soon. He was expected to survive for about six months. Everything can only be given to god.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-weight:bold;font-style:italic;">Data 10 </span><span class="font1">(16:29 - 17:05)</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Zach : How long ?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Doctor : Every case is different. There’s no way to really know.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Zach : Will I make it to graduation?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Doctor : If graduation is end of spring, it’s hard to say. We’re giving it six to ten months. I’am so sorry.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Zach : Mom, can I stop chemo ?</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">According to the theory of Kenney (1966) the data above included to internal conflict. His curiosity wanted to stop doing chemotherapy. Zach was rightly shocked by what the doctor said. The time to live won't be long. On the other hand, his graduation ceremony is near where he can realize his dream to sing his own song and through the song in the hope of motivating people to always be excited and rise again, especially in a hurry.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In the following quotation </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">“Mom, can I stop chemo?”</span><span class="font1"> from Zach. He even knows if he continues chemo even if there won't be any significant results. The result will further worsen his health . He has felt too much of the torment of chemotherapy. The resolution in this scene based on theory Deetz and Stevenson is Avoidance. Avoidance is a common and passive way to deal with the conflict.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">In the data above, Zach tries to avoid talking about his illness. He decided to stop doing chemotherapy. Although it's a tough decision but still no other option.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">IV. &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;CONCLUSION</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1">Based on the previous analysis and discussion, some conclusion can be formulated as the following: In Clouds movie, there are two types of problem that have been analyzed. The problem in the movie Clouds describes kind of conflicts using the theory of Kenney (1966:5) and how the way the main character managed the conflict with all problem that he gets using the theory of Deetz and Stevenson</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">(1986:210 – 218). The conflict of the main character by Zach be categorized into two general types : external and internal conflict. Mostly the dominant conflict it is shown in Clouds movie is external conflict occurred between man vs man.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">Every character struggle against another character. Some example, the conflict between Zach and Sammy. The kind of conflict is external conflict and Zach used Compromise strategy to managing their solution. Then another conflict found are between Zach and Amy and she used Pacisifation resolution of the conflict to manage it. It is called man vs man. Every character need to manage all of the external conflict with themselves. The internal conflict is the conflict that is become from the inside of mind the character. The conflict is happening in Zach. He manages the conflict with herself and manage the solution. Zach need to makes the good way to handling the conflict. In internal conflict, a character may have decide between right and wrong or between two solutions to a problem.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">The conclusion of this study is almost all of dialogues are focused to Zach. It means that Zach is the main character. Then evidence that Zach is the main character are most of the conflict in this movie involve Zach both external and internal conflict. Also Zach is did it well to solving all the problem and conflict.</span></p>
<p><span class="font1">REFERENCES</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">[1] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Artini, 2011. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">A Conflict Analysis of The Main Character in the Novel &quot;Lady Chattreley’s &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Lover”.</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Denpasar:Udayana University.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">[2] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bernhardt, 1953. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Practical Psychology. Canada : Mc Graw-Hill Book Inc.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[3] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Dean &amp;&nbsp;Tjosvold, 1995. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Conflict Management, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Efficacy, &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and</span></p></li></ul>
<p><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Performance in Self-Managing Work Teams. New York:John Wiles &amp;&nbsp;sons, Inc.</span></p>
<ul style="list-style:none;"><li>
<p><span class="font1">[4] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Eagleton, 1996. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Literary Theory An Introduction(Second Edition). Oxford: Blackwell Publishing Ltd</span><span class="font1">.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[5] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Gail &amp;&nbsp;Myers, 1992. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">A Laboratory Approach Dynamic Of Human Communication. New York: McGraw-Hill</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[6] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Hornby, 2006. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">Oxford Advanced Learner’s Dictionary Oxford: Oxford University.</span></p></li>
<li>
<p><span class="font1">[7] &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Kenney, 1996. </span><span class="font1" style="font-style:italic;">How to analyze fiction. New York:Monarch Press.</span></p></li></ul>