---
layout: post
title: "Pengaruh Karakteristik Sosial Demografi Dan Brand Image Terhadap Keputusan Pembelian Smartphone Merek Blackberry"
author: "ditya pramadi, Alit Suryani"
description: "Blackberry is one of the means of communication or often called smartphones growing in Indonesia Since the beginning penetration in 2004 a lot of the Blackberry smartp"
categories: manajemen
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/manajemen/id-5175
tags:

---

## Authors:
ditya pramadi, Alit Suryani

## Abstract:
"Blackberry is one of the means of communication or often called smartphones growing in Indonesia. Since the beginning penetration in 2004, a lot of the Blackberry smartphone reap success and can be a top leader in the sale of its products in Indonesia. The purpose of this study is to investigate and analyze the influence of demographic and social characteristics of the brand image (brand image) on purchase decisions Blackberry smartphone brand in the area of Denpasar. The research was conducted in the city of Denpasar. The variables studied were demographics, brand image, and purchasing decisions. The sampling technique used was based on purposive sampling with total respondent 110 users of smartphone Blackberry. The data analysis technique used is Structural Equation Modelling or SEM. Based on the survey results revealed that: 1) demographic variable has a positive and significant impact on purchasing decisions. 2) Variable brand image has a positive and significant impact on purchasing decisions. The results of this study are expected to provide a feedback for RIM (Research In Motion) which is a produsen of smartphone Blackberry that demographic and brand image influence a purchase decision of Blackberry."

### Keywords
Keyword Not Available

### Downloads:
Download data is not yet available.

### PDF:
https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/manajemen/article/view/5175/4297

### Published
2013-06-07

### How To Cite
PRAMADI, ditya; SURYANI, Alit.  Pengaruh Karakteristik Sosial Demografi Dan Brand Image Terhadap Keputusan Pembelian Smartphone Merek Blackberry.E-Jurnal Manajemen, [S.l.], v. 2, n. 6, june 2013. ISSN 2302-8912. Available at: <https://jurnal.harianregional.com/manajemen/id-5175>. Date accessed: {{ site.time | date: "%d %b. %Y" }}.

## Citation Format Options:
ABNT, APA, BibTeX, CBE, EndNote - EndNote format (Macintosh & Windows), MLA, ProCite - RIS format (Macintosh & Windows), RefWorks, Reference Manager - RIS format (Windows only), Turabian

### Issue
Vol 2 No 6 (2013)

### Section 
**Articles**

## Copyright
This work is licensed under a <a href="http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/" rel="nofollow">Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License</a>.

## References
- Anggereni, N. W. E. S. (2018). Pengaruh Pelatihan terhadap Kinerja Karyawan Pada Lembaga Perkreditan Desa (LPD) Kabupaten Buleleng. Jurnal Pendidikan Ekonomi Undiksha, 10(2), hal. 606–615.
- Ardanti, D. M. , & R. E. (2017). Pengaruh Pelatihan, Efikasi Diri dan Keterikatan Karyawan Terhadap Kinerja Karyawan (Studi pada Patra Semarang Hotel & Convention). Diponegoro Journal of Management, 6(3), 165–175.
- Arifin, Z. , H. H. N. M. , J. M. , & R. H. P. (2021). The Role of Employees Engagement and Self-Efficacy on Employee Performance: An Empirical Study on Palm Oil Company. Natural Volatiles & Essential Oils. Natural Volatiles & Essential Oils, 8(4), pp. 10177–10190.
- Astuti, R., & Gunawan, W. (2016). Sumber-Sumber Efikasi Diri Karier Remaja. Jurnal Psikogenesis, 4(2), hal. 141–151.
- Avkiran, N. (2018). Partial Least Square Structural Equation Modeling: Recent Advances in Banking and Finance. New York City: Springer.
- Bandura, A. (1986). Social Foundation of Thoughts and Action: A Social Cognitive Theory. Prentice Hall.
- Carter, W., Nespit, P., Badham, R., Parker, S., & Sung, L. (2018). The Effects of Employee Engagement and Self-efficacy on Job Performance: A Longitudinal Field Study. The International Journal of Human Resource Management, 29(17), pp. 2483–2502.
- Çetin, F., & Aşkun, D. (2018). The effect of occupational self-efficacy on work performance through intrinsic work motivation. Management Research Review, 41(2), pp. 186–201.
- Cherian, J., & Jacob, J. (2013). Impact of Self Efficacy on Motivation and Performance of Employees. International Journal of Business and Management, 8(14), pp. 80–88.
- Darodjat, T. A. (2015). Konsep-Konsep Dasar Manajemen Personalia Masa Kini. PT Refika Aditama.
- Dehghani, F., Barkhordari-Sharifabad, M., Sedaghati-Kasbakhi, M., & Fallahzadeh, H. (2020). Effect of palliative care training on perceived self-efficacy of the nurses. BMC Palliative Care, 19(1). https://doi.org/10.1186/s12904-020-00567-4
- Dermawan, I. (2020). The Influence of Charismatic Leadership and Training on The Performance of the Indonesian Navy Hydrographic and Oceanographic Center with Self Efficacy as an Intervening Variable. Jurnal Dinamika Manajemen dan Bisnis, 3(2), pp. 112-136
- Ghozali, I. (2014). Structural Equation Modeling, Metode Alternatif dengan Partial Least Square (PLS). Badan Penerbit Universitas Diponegoro.
- Girsang, L., Zulkarnain, Z., & Isnaniah, I. (2021). Pengaruh Pelatihan dan Budaya Organisasi Terhadap Kinerja Karyawan PT. Lintas Aman Andalas Medan. Jurnal Ilmiah Manajemen Dan Bisnis (JIMBI), 2(1), hal. 1–8.
- Halawi, A., & Haydar, N. (2018). Effects of Training on Employee Performance: A Case Study of Bonjus and Khatib & Alami Companies. International Humanities Studies, 5(2), pp. 24-45.
- Idris. (2021). Peran Mediasi Self-Efficacy terhadap Pelatihan dan Kinerja Pegawai BAPPEDA Kabupaten Kepulauan Meranti. Jurnal AKMA (Akuntansi Dan Manajemen), 7(3), hal. 36–51.
- Karim, Md. M., Choudhury, M. M., & Latif, W. B. (2019). The Impact of Training and Development on Employees’ Performance: An Analysis of Quantitative Data. Noble International Journal of Business and Management Reesearch, 3(2), pp. 25–33.
- Kharismayanti, N. K. A., Agung, A. A. P., & Anggraini, N. P. N. (2022). Pengaruh Gaya Kepemimpinan Transformasional dan Kerjasama Tim terhadap Kinerja Karyawan pada Lembaga Perkreditan Desa (LPD) Desa Pakraman Padangsambian. Jurnal EMAS, 3(7), 49–62.
- Kuruppu, C. L., Kavirathne, C. S., & Karunarathna, N. (2021). The Impact of Training on Employee Performance in a Selected Apparel Sector Organization in Sri Lanka. Global Journal of Management and Business Research, pp. 13–20.
- Lianto, L. (2019). Self-Efficacy: A Brief Literature Review. Jurnal Manajemen Motivasi, 15(2), hal. 55-61.
- Lisbona, A. , Palaci, F. ;, Salanova, M. ;, & Frese, M. (2018). The Effect of Work Engagement and Self-Efficacy on Personal Initiative and Performance, 30(1), pp. 89-104.
- Mangkunegara, A. P. (2020). Manajemen Sumber Daya Manusia Perusahaan. PT Remaja Rosdakarya.
- Masram, & Mu’ah. (2017). Manajemen Sumber Daya Manusia. Zifatama Publisher.
- Meria, L., & Tamzil, F. (2021). Pengaruh Efikasi Diri terhadap Kesiapan untuk Berubah dan Kinerja Karyawan. Forum Ilmiah, 18(2), 279–290.
- Michael, T. (2017). Manajemen Sumber Daya Manusia (Edisi Revisi). CV. R.A.De.Rozarie.
- Parjianto, J., Yanto, A. D., & Erlita, D. (2021). Pengaruh Pelatihan Berpikir Positif Terhadap Peningkatan Efikasi Diri Akademik pada Mahasiswa Baru Fakultas Psikologi Universitas Airlangga. Jurnal Sains Psikologi, 10(2), pp. 118-135
- Rahyuda, M. S. I. E. (2020). Metode Penelitian Bisnis. Udayana Press.
- Robbins, S. P., & Mary Coulter. (2016). Manajemen, Jilid 1 Edisi 13. Erlangga.
- Sahrah, A. (2016). Pengaruh Pelatihan Goal Setting terhadap Efikasi Diri Manajer Tingkat Menengah di PT BAT Yogyakarta. InSight. 18(2), hal. 191-204.
- Santi, D. E., & Puspaningrum. (2022). Pengaruh Pelatihan Komunikasi untuk Meningkatkan Efikasi Diri Karyawan. Jurnal Darma Agung, 30(1), 343–348.
- Saputra Pakpahan, E. (2014). Pengaruh Pendidikan dan Pelatihan terhadap Kinerja Pegawai (Studi pada Badan Kepegawaian Daerah Kota Malang). Jurnal Administrasi Publik, 2(1), hal. 116-121
- Setiawan, I., Ekhsan, M., & Dhyan Parashakti, R. (2021). Pengaruh Pelatihan terhadap Kinerja Karyawan yang di Mediasi Kepuasan Kerja. Jurnal Perspektif Manajerial Dan Kewirauhsaan (JPMK), 1(2), 186–195.
- Sugiyono. (2018). Metode Penelitian Manajemen. Penerbit Alfabeta .
- Sukmawati, E., Langgeng Ratnasari, S., & Zulkifli. (2020). Pengaruh Gaya Kepemimpinan, Komunikasi, Pelatihan, Etos Kerja, dan Karakteristik Individu terhadap Kinerja Karyawan. Dimensi, 9(3), hal. 461–479.
- Wastuti, S. N. Y. (2018). Efikasi Diri terhadap Kinerja Karyawan PDAM Tirtanadi Unit Instalasi Pengolahan Air Sunggal. Biblio Couns : Jurnal Kajian Konseling Dan Pendidikan, 1(2), 35–42.
- Wibisono, D. E., & Yuniawan, A. (2021). Pengaruh Pelatihan Online Terhadap Keterikatan Karyawan dengan Pengembangan Karir dan Efikasi Diri sebagai Variabel Intervening (Studi pada Karyawan PT. Bank Negara Indonesia Tbk Purwokerto). Diponegoro Journal of Management, 10(5), hal, 1–11.
- Wijaya, I. B. A. A., & Dewi, I. G. A. M. (2020). Pengaruh Kepemimpinan Transformasional terhadap Kinerja Karyawan dengan Efikasi Diri sebagai Variabel Mediasi. E-Jurnal Manajemen, 9(12), 3621–3640.
- Younas, W., Farooq, M., Khalil-Ur-Rehman, F., & Zreen, A. (2018). The Impact of Training and Development on Employee Performance IOSR Journals The Impact of Training and Development on Employee Performance. IOSR Journal of Business and Management (IOSR-JBM), 20(7), 20–23.

