---
layout: post
title: "ANALISIS MATERIAL REQUIREMENT PLANNING PRODUK COCONUT SUGAR PADA KUL-KUL FARM"
author: "Kukuh Anggara Martha, Putu Yudi Setiawan"
description: "Raw material inventory is one of the important assets for the company errors in raw material planning will lead to problems in the production process it is important t"
categories: manajemen
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/manajemen/id-40557
tags:

---

## Authors:
Kukuh Anggara Martha, Putu Yudi Setiawan

## Abstract:
"Raw material inventory is one of the important assets for the company, errors in raw material planning will lead to problems in the production process, it is important to do a good raw material inventory planning. One of the concepts that can be applied is by using the Material Requirement Planning (MRP) system. This study aims to: (1) Know and determine the amount of net demand for each raw material Coconut Sugar 150 gr / jar. (2) To know and determine the optimal order size for each raw material of Coconut Sugar product 150 gr / jar. (3) Knowing and determining the right time to do the ordering plan for each raw material of Coconut Sugar 150 gr / jar. (4) Knowing and determining the method that produces the lowest cost for Coconut Sugar product 150 gr / jar. The data used are quantitative and qualitative data obtained from interviews to some parties related to coconut sugar production and observation on the object under study. Data analysis technique used is descriptive analysis technique which explain systematically with stages namely: making Master Production Schedule, determination of net requirement, lot size determination (Lot for lot method and Part Period Balancing), determination of optimal lot sizing method, and determination of order time raw material or MRP table manufacturing process. The results showed: (1) The net requirement for each raw material was obtained from the difference between the gross requirement with the revenue plan and the lead time of each raw material. (2) The determination of the optimal order size for each raw material is done by using lot for lot method and part period balancing. (3) The determination of the ordering time of the raw materials is the same as making the MRP table for each raw material and is based on the lot sizing method which has been selected previously. (4) Comparison of the final result shows that the method of part-time balancing with total inventory cost of Rp 53,979 is the method that produces the lowest cost, when compared with the lot for lot method that generates total inventory cost of Rp 192.000, but especially for the raw material of coconut palm using Lot for lot method to avoid stored raw materials."

### Keywords
Keyword Not Available

### Downloads:
Download data is not yet available.

### PDF:
https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/manajemen/article/view/40557/26866

### Published
2018-12-03

### How To Cite
MARTHA, Kukuh Anggara; SETIAWAN, Putu Yudi.  ANALISIS MATERIAL REQUIREMENT PLANNING PRODUK COCONUT SUGAR PADA KUL-KUL FARM.E-Jurnal Manajemen, [S.l.], v. 7, n. 12, p. 6532 - 6560, dec. 2018. ISSN 2302-8912. Available at: <https://jurnal.harianregional.com/manajemen/id-40557>. Date accessed: {{ site.time | date: "%d %b. %Y" }}. doi:https://doi.org/10.24843/EJMUNUD.2018.v07.i12.p06.

## Citation Format Options:
ABNT, APA, BibTeX, CBE, EndNote - EndNote format (Macintosh & Windows), MLA, ProCite - RIS format (Macintosh & Windows), RefWorks, Reference Manager - RIS format (Windows only), Turabian

### Issue
Vol 7 No 12 (2018)

### Section 
**Articles**

## Copyright
This work is licensed under a <a href="http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/" rel="nofollow">Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License</a>.

## References
- Anggereni, N. W. E. S. (2018). Pengaruh Pelatihan terhadap Kinerja Karyawan Pada Lembaga Perkreditan Desa (LPD) Kabupaten Buleleng. Jurnal Pendidikan Ekonomi Undiksha, 10(2), hal. 606–615.
- Ardanti, D. M. , & R. E. (2017). Pengaruh Pelatihan, Efikasi Diri dan Keterikatan Karyawan Terhadap Kinerja Karyawan (Studi pada Patra Semarang Hotel & Convention). Diponegoro Journal of Management, 6(3), 165–175.
- Arifin, Z. , H. H. N. M. , J. M. , & R. H. P. (2021). The Role of Employees Engagement and Self-Efficacy on Employee Performance: An Empirical Study on Palm Oil Company. Natural Volatiles & Essential Oils. Natural Volatiles & Essential Oils, 8(4), pp. 10177–10190.
- Astuti, R., & Gunawan, W. (2016). Sumber-Sumber Efikasi Diri Karier Remaja. Jurnal Psikogenesis, 4(2), hal. 141–151.
- Avkiran, N. (2018). Partial Least Square Structural Equation Modeling: Recent Advances in Banking and Finance. New York City: Springer.
- Bandura, A. (1986). Social Foundation of Thoughts and Action: A Social Cognitive Theory. Prentice Hall.
- Carter, W., Nespit, P., Badham, R., Parker, S., & Sung, L. (2018). The Effects of Employee Engagement and Self-efficacy on Job Performance: A Longitudinal Field Study. The International Journal of Human Resource Management, 29(17), pp. 2483–2502.
- Çetin, F., & Aşkun, D. (2018). The effect of occupational self-efficacy on work performance through intrinsic work motivation. Management Research Review, 41(2), pp. 186–201.
- Cherian, J., & Jacob, J. (2013). Impact of Self Efficacy on Motivation and Performance of Employees. International Journal of Business and Management, 8(14), pp. 80–88.
- Darodjat, T. A. (2015). Konsep-Konsep Dasar Manajemen Personalia Masa Kini. PT Refika Aditama.
- Dehghani, F., Barkhordari-Sharifabad, M., Sedaghati-Kasbakhi, M., & Fallahzadeh, H. (2020). Effect of palliative care training on perceived self-efficacy of the nurses. BMC Palliative Care, 19(1). https://doi.org/10.1186/s12904-020-00567-4
- Dermawan, I. (2020). The Influence of Charismatic Leadership and Training on The Performance of the Indonesian Navy Hydrographic and Oceanographic Center with Self Efficacy as an Intervening Variable. Jurnal Dinamika Manajemen dan Bisnis, 3(2), pp. 112-136
- Ghozali, I. (2014). Structural Equation Modeling, Metode Alternatif dengan Partial Least Square (PLS). Badan Penerbit Universitas Diponegoro.
- Girsang, L., Zulkarnain, Z., & Isnaniah, I. (2021). Pengaruh Pelatihan dan Budaya Organisasi Terhadap Kinerja Karyawan PT. Lintas Aman Andalas Medan. Jurnal Ilmiah Manajemen Dan Bisnis (JIMBI), 2(1), hal. 1–8.
- Halawi, A., & Haydar, N. (2018). Effects of Training on Employee Performance: A Case Study of Bonjus and Khatib & Alami Companies. International Humanities Studies, 5(2), pp. 24-45.
- Idris. (2021). Peran Mediasi Self-Efficacy terhadap Pelatihan dan Kinerja Pegawai BAPPEDA Kabupaten Kepulauan Meranti. Jurnal AKMA (Akuntansi Dan Manajemen), 7(3), hal. 36–51.
- Karim, Md. M., Choudhury, M. M., & Latif, W. B. (2019). The Impact of Training and Development on Employees’ Performance: An Analysis of Quantitative Data. Noble International Journal of Business and Management Reesearch, 3(2), pp. 25–33.
- Kharismayanti, N. K. A., Agung, A. A. P., & Anggraini, N. P. N. (2022). Pengaruh Gaya Kepemimpinan Transformasional dan Kerjasama Tim terhadap Kinerja Karyawan pada Lembaga Perkreditan Desa (LPD) Desa Pakraman Padangsambian. Jurnal EMAS, 3(7), 49–62.
- Kuruppu, C. L., Kavirathne, C. S., & Karunarathna, N. (2021). The Impact of Training on Employee Performance in a Selected Apparel Sector Organization in Sri Lanka. Global Journal of Management and Business Research, pp. 13–20.
- Lianto, L. (2019). Self-Efficacy: A Brief Literature Review. Jurnal Manajemen Motivasi, 15(2), hal. 55-61.
- Lisbona, A. , Palaci, F. ;, Salanova, M. ;, & Frese, M. (2018). The Effect of Work Engagement and Self-Efficacy on Personal Initiative and Performance, 30(1), pp. 89-104.
- Mangkunegara, A. P. (2020). Manajemen Sumber Daya Manusia Perusahaan. PT Remaja Rosdakarya.
- Masram, & Mu’ah. (2017). Manajemen Sumber Daya Manusia. Zifatama Publisher.
- Meria, L., & Tamzil, F. (2021). Pengaruh Efikasi Diri terhadap Kesiapan untuk Berubah dan Kinerja Karyawan. Forum Ilmiah, 18(2), 279–290.
- Michael, T. (2017). Manajemen Sumber Daya Manusia (Edisi Revisi). CV. R.A.De.Rozarie.
- Parjianto, J., Yanto, A. D., & Erlita, D. (2021). Pengaruh Pelatihan Berpikir Positif Terhadap Peningkatan Efikasi Diri Akademik pada Mahasiswa Baru Fakultas Psikologi Universitas Airlangga. Jurnal Sains Psikologi, 10(2), pp. 118-135
- Rahyuda, M. S. I. E. (2020). Metode Penelitian Bisnis. Udayana Press.
- Robbins, S. P., & Mary Coulter. (2016). Manajemen, Jilid 1 Edisi 13. Erlangga.
- Sahrah, A. (2016). Pengaruh Pelatihan Goal Setting terhadap Efikasi Diri Manajer Tingkat Menengah di PT BAT Yogyakarta. InSight. 18(2), hal. 191-204.
- Santi, D. E., & Puspaningrum. (2022). Pengaruh Pelatihan Komunikasi untuk Meningkatkan Efikasi Diri Karyawan. Jurnal Darma Agung, 30(1), 343–348.
- Saputra Pakpahan, E. (2014). Pengaruh Pendidikan dan Pelatihan terhadap Kinerja Pegawai (Studi pada Badan Kepegawaian Daerah Kota Malang). Jurnal Administrasi Publik, 2(1), hal. 116-121
- Setiawan, I., Ekhsan, M., & Dhyan Parashakti, R. (2021). Pengaruh Pelatihan terhadap Kinerja Karyawan yang di Mediasi Kepuasan Kerja. Jurnal Perspektif Manajerial Dan Kewirauhsaan (JPMK), 1(2), 186–195.
- Sugiyono. (2018). Metode Penelitian Manajemen. Penerbit Alfabeta .
- Sukmawati, E., Langgeng Ratnasari, S., & Zulkifli. (2020). Pengaruh Gaya Kepemimpinan, Komunikasi, Pelatihan, Etos Kerja, dan Karakteristik Individu terhadap Kinerja Karyawan. Dimensi, 9(3), hal. 461–479.
- Wastuti, S. N. Y. (2018). Efikasi Diri terhadap Kinerja Karyawan PDAM Tirtanadi Unit Instalasi Pengolahan Air Sunggal. Biblio Couns : Jurnal Kajian Konseling Dan Pendidikan, 1(2), 35–42.
- Wibisono, D. E., & Yuniawan, A. (2021). Pengaruh Pelatihan Online Terhadap Keterikatan Karyawan dengan Pengembangan Karir dan Efikasi Diri sebagai Variabel Intervening (Studi pada Karyawan PT. Bank Negara Indonesia Tbk Purwokerto). Diponegoro Journal of Management, 10(5), hal, 1–11.
- Wijaya, I. B. A. A., & Dewi, I. G. A. M. (2020). Pengaruh Kepemimpinan Transformasional terhadap Kinerja Karyawan dengan Efikasi Diri sebagai Variabel Mediasi. E-Jurnal Manajemen, 9(12), 3621–3640.
- Younas, W., Farooq, M., Khalil-Ur-Rehman, F., & Zreen, A. (2018). The Impact of Training and Development on Employee Performance IOSR Journals The Impact of Training and Development on Employee Performance. IOSR Journal of Business and Management (IOSR-JBM), 20(7), 20–23.

