---
layout: post
title: "Pengaruh Sustainable Marketing Terhadap Keputusan Pembelian Beras Organik"
author: "Ni Made Dwining Purwanti (Mahasiswa Program Studi Teknologi Industri Pertanian, Fakultas Teknologi Pertanian, Unud), I Ketut Satriawan (Dosen Program Studi Teknologi Industri Pertanian, Fakultas Teknologi Pertanian, Unud), I Wayan Gede Sedana Yoga (Dosen Program Studi Teknologi Industri Pertanian, Fakultas Teknologi Pertanian, Unud)"
tags: Sustainable marketing, purchasing decision, structural equation modeling (SEM
categories: jtip

---

## DOI:
https://doi.org/10.24843/JRMA.2021.v09.i04.p11

## Published Date:
2021-12-30

## Authors:
Ni Made Dwining Purwanti (Mahasiswa Program Studi Teknologi Industri Pertanian, Fakultas Teknologi Pertanian, Unud), I Ketut Satriawan (Dosen Program Studi Teknologi Industri Pertanian, Fakultas Teknologi Pertanian, Unud), I Wayan Gede Sedana Yoga (Dosen Program Studi Teknologi Industri Pertanian, Fakultas Teknologi Pertanian, Unud)

## Main Article Content

## Abstract:
Sustainable marketing as a marketing strategy concept can influence consumers to make purchasing decisions. The purpose of this study was to analyze the influence of sustainable marketing variables on the decision to purchase organic rice of Somya Pertiwi Agricultural and Rural Training Center (P4S) and to find out the right recommendations to be given to companies in the application of sustainable marketing. Sampling is done by sampling nonprobability sampling methods and data collection is done by distributing questionnaires and directly to respondents. Data analysis is done by structural equation modeling (SEM) method. The results obtained in this study are that purchasing decisions are influenced by customer solutions (X1) with direct influence of 35.5%, customer cost (X2) with direct influence of 25.7%, convenience (X3) with direct influence of 16.2%, communication (X4) with direct influence of 19.2%, and correlation (X4) with direct influence of 17.2%. Among the five variables, the customer solution is the variable that most influences purchasing decisions in P4S Somya Pertiwi with a value of 0.355, and the variable with the lowest effect is convenience with a value of 0.162. 
Keywords: Sustainable marketing, purchasing decision, structural equation modeling (SEM)

### Keywords:
Sustainable marketing, purchasing decision, structural equation modeling (SEM

### Downloads:
https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/jtip/article/view/82923/42997

## Article Details

## How to Cite:
PURWANTI, Ni Made Dwining; 						SATRIAWAN, I Ketut; 						YOGA, I Wayan Gede Sedana.
 Pengaruh Sustainable Marketing Terhadap Keputusan Pembelian Beras Organik.
JURNAL REKAYASA DAN MANAJEMEN AGROINDUSTRI, [S.l.], v. 9, n. 4, p. 549-559, dec. 2021.
ISSN 2503-488X.
Available at: <https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/jtip/article/view/82923>. Date accessed: {{ site.time | date: '%y' }}
doi: https://doi.org/10.24843/JRMA.2021.v09.i04.p11.

## Citation Format Options:
ABNT, APA, BibTeX, CBE, EndNote - EndNote format (Macintosh & Windows), MLA, ProCite - RIS format (Macintosh & Windows), RefWorks, Reference Manager - RIS format (Windows only), Turabian

## Issue:
Vol 9 No 4 (2021): Desember

## Section:
Articles

## Copyright:
Ciptaan disebarluaskan di bawah Lisensi Creative Commons Atribusi-BerbagiSerupa 4.0 Internasional.Seluruh artikel di Jurnal ini dapat disebarluaskan atas tetap mencantumkan sumber yang syah. Identitas judul artikel tidak boleh dihilangkan. Penerbit tidak bertangggung jawab terhadap naskah yang dipublikasikan. Isi artikel menjadi tanggung jawab Penulis.

## References:
- Asif, M., W. Xuhui., A. Nasiri dan S. Ayyub. 2018. Determinant factors influencing organic food purchase intention and the moderating role of awareness: A comparative analysis. Food Quality and Preference. 63(1):144-150.
- Berita Resmi Statistik. 2021. Luas Panen, Produksi, dan Produktivitas Padi Menurut Kabupaten/Kota di Provinsi Bali 2018-2019. Badan Pusat Statistik Provinsi Bali, Denpasar.
- Fernando, M.W. 2018. The Sustainable Marketing Concept in European SMEs. Emerald Publishing Limited, West Yorkshire.
- Ghozali, I. 2014. Structural Equation Modelling Metode Alternatif dengan Partial Least Square. Badan Penerbit Universitas Diponegoro, Semarang.
- Hair, J.F., C.M. Ringle dan M. Sarstedt. 2013. PLS-SEM indeed a silver bullet. Journal of Marketing Theory and Practice. 19(2):139-152.
- Hair, J.F., M. Sarstedt, L. Hopkins dan V.G. Kuppelwieser. 2014. PLS-SEM an emerging tool in business research. European Business Riview. 26(2):106-121.
- Hermawan, H. 2015. Analisis pengaruh bauran pemasaran terhadap keputusan, kepuasan dan loyalitas konsumen dalam pembelian roti ceria di jember. Jurnal Bisnis dan Manajemen. 9(1):84-93.
- Latan, H. dan I. Ghozali. 2014. Partial Least Square Konsep, Metode dan Aplikasi Menggunakan WarpPLS 5.0 Third Edition. Badan Penerbit Universitas Diponegoro, Semarang.
- Reutlinger, J. 2012. Sustainable Marketing. Tesis S2. Unpublished. Lahti University of Applied Sciences, Perth.
- Sarr, T. 2014. Ini Dia Buah, Sayur dan Herbal Beracun. Trans Idea Publishing, Yogyakarta.
- Sarwono, J. 2010. Pengertian dasar structural equation modelling (SEM). Jurnal Ilmiah Manajemen Bisnis. 10(3):173-182.
- Sugiyono. 2013. Metode Penelitian Pendidikan Pendekatan Kuantitatif, Kualitatif dan R&D. Alfabeta, Bandung.
- Suryawardani, I. G. A. O. dan A. S. Wiranatha. 2018. Evaluation of marketing strategy of sanur village festival based on visitor’s behavior, global stochastic analysis (GSA). MUK Publication. 5(8):65-72.
- Tenenhaus, M., V. E. Vinzi, Y. M. Chatelin dan C. Lauro. 2005. PLS path modelling. Computational Statistic and Data Analysis. 48(1):159-205.
