---
layout: post
title: "PERLINDUNGAN HUKUM BAGI KONSUMEN YANG MENGGUNAKAN PRODUK KOSMETIK PALSU"
author: "Agung Mira Diamanda, Anak Agung Gede Oka Parwata"
description: "The rise of cosmetic products in the market makes consumers interest in cosmetics every year This opportunity is a great chance for the business actor who are not respo"
categories: kertasemaya
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/kertasemaya/id-60023
tags:
  - ": Consumer Protection"
  - "Fake Cosmetic"
---

## Authors:
Agung Mira Diamanda, Anak Agung Gede Oka Parwata

## Abstract:
"The rise of cosmetic products in the market makes consumers interest in cosmetics every year. This opportunity is a great chance for the business actor who are not responsible for producing fake cosmetic products. This has caused unrest for consumers who feel their rights have been harmed. This papper aim to find out abot the legal protections for consumers who used fake cosmetic products and how businessmen responsibility for faked cosmetics products distributed to the public. The method of writing is used in this journal is normative juridical. The results showed that business actors producing fake cosmetic products have against the article number 4 of Consumer Protection Act and must be held responsible for their actions, the liability of business actors for fake cosmetic products can be carried out by way of compensation under the article number 19 of Consumer Protection Act. Keywords : Consumer Protection, Fake Cosmetic"

### Keywords
Consumer Protection, Fake Cosmetic

## Downloads:

Download data is not yet available.

## PDF:

https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/kerthasemaya/article/view/60023/35209

## Published
2020-06-24

## How To Cite
DIAMANDA, Agung Mira; OKA PARWATA, Anak Agung Gede.  PERLINDUNGAN HUKUM BAGI KONSUMEN YANG MENGGUNAKAN PRODUK KOSMETIK PALSU.Kertha Semaya : Journal Ilmu Hukum, [S.l.], v. 8, n. 6, p. 909-921, june 2020. ISSN 2303-0569. Available at: <https://jurnal.harianregional.com/kertasemaya/id-60023>. Date accessed: {{ site.time | date: "%d %b. %Y" }}.

## Citation Format Options:
ABNT, APA, BibTeX, CBE, EndNote - EndNote format (Macintosh & Windows), MLA, ProCite - RIS format (Macintosh & Windows), RefWorks, Reference Manager - RIS format (Windows only), Turabian

## Issue
Vol 8 No 6 (2020)

## Section 
**Articles**

