---
layout: post
title: "IMPLEMENTASI SISTEM PEMBELIAN BBM MELALUI APLIKASI MYPERTAMINA DITINJAU DARI PERSPEKTIF GOOD CORPORATE GOVERNANCE"
author: "Imam Subairi, Bagya Agung Prabowo"
description: "This study aims to determine the application of the fuel purchase system through MyPertamina application and the role of the government in realizing Good Corporate Gove"
categories: kertasemaya
canonical_url: https://jurnal.harianregional.com/kertasemaya/id-95969
tags:

---

## Authors:
Imam Subairi, Bagya Agung Prabowo

## Abstract:
"This study aims to determine the application of the fuel purchase system through MyPertamina application, and the role of the government in realizing Good Corporate Governance, and how community influences use of MyPertamina Application in purchasing fuel. PT. Pertamina (Persero) is a state-owned company that has just launched an application called “MyPertamina” with the aim of increasing the decision to purchase fuel through various promotions offered through MyPertamina Application. This research uses juridical-sociological research methods with a regulatory and comparative approach. Furthermore, the implementation of the fuel purchase system through MyPertamina Application is able to have a positive and effective impact. In addition, the difficulty of the community in accessing and the need for community habits and the role of the government in providing ease of access, and the problem can be solved effectively."

### Keywords
Keyword Not Available

## Downloads:

Download data is not yet available.

## PDF:

https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/kerthasemaya/article/view/95969/47738

## Published
2023-01-06

## How To Cite
SUBAIRI, Imam; PRABOWO, Bagya Agung.  IMPLEMENTASI SISTEM PEMBELIAN BBM MELALUI APLIKASI MYPERTAMINA DITINJAU DARI PERSPEKTIF GOOD CORPORATE GOVERNANCE.Kertha Semaya : Journal Ilmu Hukum, [S.l.], v. 11, n. 1, p. 192-207, jan. 2023. ISSN 2303-0569. Available at: <https://jurnal.harianregional.com/kertasemaya/id-95969>. Date accessed: {{ site.time | date: "%d %b. %Y" }}. doi:https://doi.org/10.24843/KS.2022.v11.i01.p18.

## Citation Format Options:
ABNT, APA, BibTeX, CBE, EndNote - EndNote format (Macintosh & Windows), MLA, ProCite - RIS format (Macintosh & Windows), RefWorks, Reference Manager - RIS format (Windows only), Turabian

## Issue
Vol 11 No 1 (2022)

## Section 
**Articles**

