---
layout: post
title: "Strategi Komunikasi D&amp;rsquo;OZ Radio Bali Dalam Membina Hubungan Dengan Pengiklan"
author: "Bryan Romario, Ni Luh Ramaswati Purnawan, Ni Nyoman Dewi Pascarani"
description: Stakeholders is a group individual or a community which could influence or to be influenced by the organizations goals In order to get their goals some organization
categories: komunikasi

---

## Authors:
Bryan Romario, Ni Luh Ramaswati Purnawan, Ni Nyoman Dewi Pascarani

## Abstract:
"Stakeholders is a group, individual, or a community which could influence or to be influenced by the organization’s goals. In order to get their goals, some organization put high priority on the stakeholders, it aimed to protect sustainability of the organization. Had a good stakeholders relations was the most important thing to to. D’OZ Radio is an profit organization which put the advertiser as the one of their main stakeholders. Maintained the communication strategy is the most important to do for get the organization’s goals. This research aimed to know which strategy that was used by the Oz Radio Bali, in maintained a good stakeholders relations. This researched used qualitative method which interviewed, observation, and documentary. Base on the result, D’OZ Radio Bali used persuasive strategy and dialogue strategy in maintain their stakeholders relations with the advertiser as the most important stakeholders. Key words: advertiser, communication strategy,stakeholders, stakeholders relations"

### Keywords
Keyword Not Available

## Downloads:
https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/35434/21384

## Published
2017-11-13

## How To Cite
ROMARIO, Bryan; 						PURNAWAN, Ni Luh Ramaswati; 						PASCARANI, Ni Nyoman Dewi.
 Strategi Komunikasi D’OZ Radio Bali Dalam Membina Hubungan Dengan Pengiklan.
E-Jurnal Medium, [S.l.], v. 1, n. 1, nov. 2017.
Available at: &lt;https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/35434&gt;. Date accessed: 14 feb. 2024.

## Citation Format Options:
ABNT, APA, BibTeX, CBE, EndNote - EndNote format (Macintosh & Windows), MLA, ProCite - RIS format (Macintosh & Windows), RefWorks, Reference Manager - RIS format (Windows only), Turabian

## Issue
Vol 1 No 1 (2017)
