---
layout: post
title: "REPRESENTASI ETNIS TIONGHOA DI INDONESIA DALAM FILM NGENEST"
author: "Ratih Meila Carina Widyasmara, I Dewa Ayu Sugiarica Joni, Ni Nyoman Dewi Pascarani"
description: Become one of the recognized ethnic even its position is listed in Pasal 2 UU Nomor 12 Tahun 2012 on the citizenship of the Indonesian Republic do not make Chinese etn
categories: komunikasi
tags: Film, Ngenest, Representation Chinese Ethnic, Semiotics
---

## Authors:
Ratih Meila Carina Widyasmara, I Dewa Ayu Sugiarica Joni, Ni Nyoman Dewi Pascarani

## Abstract:
"Become one of the recognized ethnic, even its position is listed in Pasal 2 UU Nomor 12 Tahun 2012 on the citizenship of the Indonesian Republic, do not make Chinese etnic get an equal treatment in the community. At least that is what Ernest Prakasa is trying to tell in the Ngenest film. In this film, Ernest as the director who also as the main character tries to describe how Chinese ethnic as a minority in the Indonesian society with all kinds of problems and impact that must be accepted. The purpose of this research is to find out the representation of Chinese ethnic in Indonesia in the film. Using qualitative descriptive approach as well as Roland Barthes semiotics analysis method. The result of this study indicate, there are particular treatments that must be accepted by Ernest because of his different cultural backgrounds and the labeling of ethnic Chinese from the community. Keywords: Film, Ngenest, Representation Chinese Ethnic, Semiotics"

### Keywords
Film, Ngenest, Representation Chinese Ethnic, Semiotics

## Downloads:
https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/31466/19200

## Published
2017-07-03

## How To Cite
CARINA WIDYASMARA, Ratih Meila; 						SUGIARICA JONI, I Dewa Ayu; 						DEWI PASCARANI, Ni Nyoman.
 REPRESENTASI ETNIS TIONGHOA DI INDONESIA DALAM FILM NGENEST.
E-Jurnal Medium, [S.l.], v. 1, n. 1, july 2017.
Available at: &lt;https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/31466&gt;. Date accessed: 14 feb. 2024.

## Citation Format Options:
ABNT, APA, BibTeX, CBE, EndNote - EndNote format (Macintosh & Windows), MLA, ProCite - RIS format (Macintosh & Windows), RefWorks, Reference Manager - RIS format (Windows only), Turabian

## Issue
Vol 1 No 1 (2017)
