---
layout: post
title: "PERAN KOMUNIKASI KEPEMIMPINAN DALAM MENJAGA  LOYALITAS KARYAWAN PADA TITILES DENPASAR"
author: "Gusti Ayu Putu Yayang Murgawantari, Ni Luh Ramaswati Purnawan, I Gusti Agung Alit Suryawati"
description: ABSTRAK The title of this research is the role of leadership communication in maintaining the loyalty of the employees of Titiles in Denpasar Bali The aim of this res
categories: komunikasi
tags: Communication, Employee, Leadership, Loyalty, Titiles.
---

## Authors:
Gusti Ayu Putu Yayang Murgawantari, Ni Luh Ramaswati Purnawan, I Gusti Agung Alit Suryawati

## Abstract:
"ABSTRAK The title of this research is “the role of leadership communication in maintaining the loyalty of the employees of Titiles in Denpasar, Bali. The aim of this research is to describe the role of leadership communication that has been done by the leader of Titiles, which has increased the loyalty of employees. This research applies descriptive qualitative method. The technique to gather the data in this research is depth interviews, observations and documentary studies. The technique to gather the 4 informants is purposive sampling. Great leadership communication skills that have been applied in Titiles also impacted the encouragement of employee’s loyalty. Through the applications of Barrett’s leadership communication (strategic objective, process, messages and communication staff) and Maslow hierarchy of needs theory principles (physiologies, secured, social, reward and self-conception) have also affected the loyalty of the employees. Keywords : Communication, Employee, Leadership, Loyalty, Titiles."

### Keywords
Communication, Employee, Leadership, Loyalty, Titiles.

## Downloads:
https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/31539/19218

## Published
2017-07-04

## How To Cite
MURGAWANTARI, Gusti Ayu Putu Yayang; 						PURNAWAN, Ni Luh Ramaswati; 						ALIT SURYAWATI, I Gusti Agung.
 PERAN KOMUNIKASI KEPEMIMPINAN DALAM MENJAGA  LOYALITAS KARYAWAN PADA TITILES DENPASAR.
E-Jurnal Medium, [S.l.], v. 1, n. 1, july 2017.
Available at: &lt;https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/31539&gt;. Date accessed: 14 feb. 2024.

## Citation Format Options:
ABNT, APA, BibTeX, CBE, EndNote - EndNote format (Macintosh & Windows), MLA, ProCite - RIS format (Macintosh & Windows), RefWorks, Reference Manager - RIS format (Windows only), Turabian

## Issue
Vol 1 No 1 (2017)
