---
layout: post
title: "Pola Jaringan Komunikasi Internal Pemerintah Kota Denpasar dalam Mengelola Program PRO Denpasar+"
author: "Ni Luh Ketut Indah Widia Sari, Ni Nyoman Dewi Pascarani, I Dewa Ayu Sugiarica Joni"
description: PRO Denpasar is one of Denpasar government program since 2013 that consider to public services function There are 40 government agencies 4 districs 43 village level 
categories: komunikasi
tags: Denpasar City Government, Internal Network Communication Pattern, PRO Denpasar+ program
---

## Authors:
Ni Luh Ketut Indah Widia Sari, Ni Nyoman Dewi Pascarani, I Dewa Ayu Sugiarica Joni

## Abstract:
"PRO Denpasar+ is one of Denpasar government program since 2013 that consider to public services function. There are 40 government agencies, 4 districs, 43 village level and others agencies in the internal Denpasar City using this program. The aim of this research is to determine the internal communication network of Denpasar city in managing PRO Denpasar+ program. The result of this research shows that the internal communication network used by the government of Denpasar City in managing PRO Denpasar+ program establishes four clicks that describe the tendency of interaction conducted by members of the organization, both between superior and subordinate, and among members who have the same level in the office. Keywords: Denpasar City Government, Internal Network Communication Pattern, PRO Denpasar+ program"

### Keywords
Denpasar City Government, Internal Network Communication Pattern, PRO Denpasar+ program

## Downloads:
https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/33617/20336

## Published
2017-09-07

## How To Cite
INDAH WIDIA SARI, Ni Luh Ketut; 						PASCARANI, Ni Nyoman Dewi; 						SUGIARICA JONI, I Dewa Ayu.
 Pola Jaringan Komunikasi Internal Pemerintah Kota Denpasar dalam Mengelola Program PRO Denpasar+.
E-Jurnal Medium, [S.l.], v. 1, n. 1, sep. 2017.
Available at: &lt;https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/33617&gt;. Date accessed: 14 feb. 2024.

## Citation Format Options:
ABNT, APA, BibTeX, CBE, EndNote - EndNote format (Macintosh & Windows), MLA, ProCite - RIS format (Macintosh & Windows), RefWorks, Reference Manager - RIS format (Windows only), Turabian

## Issue
Vol 1 No 1 (2017)
