---
layout: post
title: "IMPLEMENTASI STRATEGI KOMUNIKASI PEMASARAN TERPADU MAYBANK BALI MARATHON 2017"
author: "Aulia Bunga Yudena, I Gusti Agung Alit Suryawati, Nyoman Dewi Pascarani"
description: ABSTRACT Marketing communication is a driving factor for success within a company to introduce companies and establish relationships with consumers One effort that can
categories: komunikasi
tags: communication strategy, integrated marketing communication, Maybank Bali Marathon
---

## Authors:
Aulia Bunga Yudena, I Gusti Agung Alit Suryawati, Nyoman Dewi Pascarani

## Abstract:
"ABSTRACT Marketing communication is a driving factor for success within a company, to introduce companies and establish relationships with consumers. One effort that can be done by the company as a form of innovation from the development of communication technology to gain the trust of the community is to hold certain activities. PT Bank Maybank Indonesia as a bank that supports the lifestyle of people who like sports, especially running sports, makes an activity namely Maybank Bali Marathon (MBM). This research was conducted to find out how the integrated marketing communication strategy of the Maybank Bali Marathon Corporate Communication Division was in carrying out the Maybank Bali Marathon 2017. The research was a qualitative - descriptive study using data collection techniques in the form of interviews and document studies. The results of this study indicate that MBM uses an integrated marketing communication strategy (IMC) centrally. In addition, the marketing communication activities carried out by MBM focus more on social media (online) compared to offline activities. Keywords: communication strategy, integrated marketing communication, Maybank Bali Marathon"

### Keywords
communication strategy, integrated marketing communication, Maybank Bali Marathon

## Downloads:
Download Not Available Yet

## Published
2018-10-10

## How To Cite
YUDENA, Aulia Bunga; 						ALIT SURYAWATI, I Gusti Agung; 						PASCARANI, Nyoman Dewi.
 IMPLEMENTASI STRATEGI KOMUNIKASI PEMASARAN TERPADU MAYBANK BALI MARATHON 2017.
E-Jurnal Medium, [S.l.], v. 2, n. 02, oct. 2018.
Available at: &lt;https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/42752&gt;. Date accessed: 14 feb. 2024.

## Citation Format Options:
ABNT, APA, BibTeX, CBE, EndNote - EndNote format (Macintosh & Windows), MLA, ProCite - RIS format (Macintosh & Windows), RefWorks, Reference Manager - RIS format (Windows only), Turabian

## Issue
Vol 2 No 02 (2018)
