---
layout: post
title: "Strategi Periklanan Akun Instagram @deliciousbali"
author: "Ni Putu Mega Kartikasari, Ni Made Ras Amanda Gelgel, Ni Luh Ramaswati Purnawan"
description: ABSTARCT deliciousbali is one of a culinary account that is well known in Bali based on social media Instagram The popularity of deliciousbali account makes it as a r
categories: komunikasi
tags: Advertisement, @deliciousbali account, Instagram
---

## Authors:
Ni Putu Mega Kartikasari, Ni Made Ras Amanda Gelgel, Ni Luh Ramaswati Purnawan

## Abstract:
"ABSTARCT @deliciousbali is one of a culinary account that is well known in Bali based on social media Instagram. The popularity of @deliciousbali account makes it as a reference to Balinese youngster who are confused about finding a place to eat. By this matter, some of culinary entrepreneurs want to advertise their businesses on @deliciousbali account. The purpose of this study is to find out how the advertising strategy of @deliciousbali Instagram account. The research results show that account of @deliciousbali is having 2 services in the process of delivering the advertisement, first of all the photos were prepared and took by @deliciousbali account, and the second one the photos were prepared by the clients. In the strategy of ‘what to say’ is using only one theme that is modern culinary. Keywords: Advertisement, @deliciousbali account, Instagram"

### Keywords
Advertisement, @deliciousbali account, Instagram

## Downloads:
https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/38903/23535

## Published
2018-04-09

## How To Cite
KARTIKASARI, Ni Putu Mega; 						AMANDA GELGEL, Ni Made Ras; 						PURNAWAN, Ni Luh Ramaswati.
 Strategi Periklanan Akun Instagram @deliciousbali.
E-Jurnal Medium, [S.l.], v. 1, n. 2, apr. 2018.
Available at: &lt;https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/38903&gt;. Date accessed: 14 feb. 2024.

## Citation Format Options:
ABNT, APA, BibTeX, CBE, EndNote - EndNote format (Macintosh & Windows), MLA, ProCite - RIS format (Macintosh & Windows), RefWorks, Reference Manager - RIS format (Windows only), Turabian

## Issue
Vol 1 No 2 (2018)
