---
layout: post
title: "REPRESENTASI TINDAKAN DIKRIMINASI RAS KULIT HITAM DALAM FILM GLORY ROAD"
author: "Ngakan Bayu Prayuda, I Dewa Ayu Sugiarica Joni, Ade Devia Pradipta"
description: ABSTRACT Discrimination is the distinction between unfair and unbalanced treatment carried out to distinguish between individuals or groups based on specific attributes
categories: komunikasi
tags: Discrimination, Representation, Semiotics, Film
---

## Authors:
Ngakan Bayu Prayuda, I Dewa Ayu Sugiarica Joni, Ade Devia Pradipta

## Abstract:
"ABSTRACT Discrimination is the distinction between unfair and unbalanced treatment carried out to distinguish between individuals, or groups based on specific attributes such as race, ethnicity, religion, or social class membership. The Glory Road film tells of a team that changes everything in national basketball rules and black players have never been on the national players list, because they consider black players unable to lead, and moreover it&#x27;s difficult to hold back emotions. This study includes qualitative research that focuses on the analysis of semiotics developed by Roland Barthes which consists of denotation, connotation and myth. The purposexof this study was toxfind out the representation of black racial discrimination inrthe film Glory Road. Based on the analysis of related scenes by using Roland Barthes&#x27; semiotics method in the film, addressing direct and indirect discrimination. The results were shown by the black race being underestimated by statements from the white race. Not only that, the black race while on the field was seen to be treated differently when on the field or harm the black race. This is displayed through various scenes in the film. Keywords: Discrimination,Representation,Semiotics, Film"

### Keywords
Discrimination, Representation, Semiotics, Film

## Downloads:
https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/42850/26002

## Published
2018-10-16

## How To Cite
PRAYUDA, Ngakan Bayu; 						SUGIARICA JONI, I Dewa Ayu; 						PRADIPTA, Ade Devia.
 REPRESENTASI TINDAKAN DIKRIMINASI RAS KULIT HITAM DALAM FILM GLORY ROAD.
E-Jurnal Medium, [S.l.], v. 2, n. 02, oct. 2018.
Available at: &lt;https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/42850&gt;. Date accessed: 14 feb. 2024.

## Citation Format Options:
ABNT, APA, BibTeX, CBE, EndNote - EndNote format (Macintosh & Windows), MLA, ProCite - RIS format (Macintosh & Windows), RefWorks, Reference Manager - RIS format (Windows only), Turabian

## Issue
Vol 2 No 02 (2018)
