---
layout: post
title: "STRATEGI KOMUNIKASI BALI DEAF COMMUNITY DALAM MENSOSIALISASIKAN BISINDO (BAHASA ISYARAT INDONESIA) KEPADA MASYARAKAT"
author: "Ni Putu Laksmitha Deviyanti, Ida Sugiarica Joni, I Gusti Agung Alit Suryawati"
description: ABSTRACT Nonverbal communication such as sign language became the focus in this research how the deaf can deliver the messages by body language and expression that use
categories: komunikasi
tags: BISINDO (Indonesian sign languages), The Deaf, Communication Strategy
---

## Authors:
Ni Putu Laksmitha Deviyanti, Ida Sugiarica Joni, I Gusti Agung Alit Suryawati

## Abstract:
"ABSTRACT Non-verbal communication such as sign language became the focus in this research, how the deaf can deliver the messages by body language and expression that used in sign language. The purpose of..this research is to know about the communication strategy that used by Bali Deaf Community in socialize BISINDO (Indonesian sign languages) to the public. Data collection is done by participant observation method, interview and documentation study. The type of this research is qualitative research with post-positivist paradigm. The analysis technic that is used in this research is Milles and Huberman analysis and used purposive sampling technic to determine the informant. The result of this research..showed that there are the effective communication strategy in socialize BISINDO (Indonesian sign languages) to the public, those are (1) determine the communicator who is competent to deliver the messages, (2) set the socialization targets, (3) Arrange the message that will delivered to the public by providing sign language module, (4) and social media usage in socialize BISINDO (Indonesian sign language). Keywords: BISINDO (Indonesian sign languages), The Deaf, Communication Strategy"

### Keywords
BISINDO (Indonesian sign languages), The Deaf, Communication Strategy

## Downloads:
https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/41156/25015

## Published
2018-07-30

## How To Cite
DEVIYANTI, Ni Putu Laksmitha; 						JONI, Ida Sugiarica; 						ALIT SURYAWATI, I Gusti Agung.
 STRATEGI KOMUNIKASI BALI DEAF COMMUNITY DALAM MENSOSIALISASIKAN BISINDO (BAHASA ISYARAT INDONESIA) KEPADA MASYARAKAT.
E-Jurnal Medium, [S.l.], v. 1, n. 2, july 2018.
Available at: &lt;https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/41156&gt;. Date accessed: 14 feb. 2024.

## Citation Format Options:
ABNT, APA, BibTeX, CBE, EndNote - EndNote format (Macintosh & Windows), MLA, ProCite - RIS format (Macintosh & Windows), RefWorks, Reference Manager - RIS format (Windows only), Turabian

## Issue
Vol 1 No 2 (2018)
