---
layout: post
title: "MOTIVASI REMAJA DI SMA NEGERI 1 MENGWI MENGGUNAKAN APLIKASI LINE SEBAGAI MEDIA KOMUNIKASI"
author: "Ni Komang Adi Pratiwi, Ni Made Ras Amanda Gelgel, Ade Devia Pradipta"
description: ABSTRACT LINE is a free instant messaging application that can be used to send text messages send photos videos voice messages etc This research focused on Motivati
categories: komunikasi

---

## Authors:
Ni Komang Adi Pratiwi, Ni Made Ras Amanda Gelgel, Ade Devia Pradipta

## Abstract:
"ABSTRACT LINE is a free instant messaging application that can be used to send text messages, send photos, videos, voice messages, etc. This research focused on Motivation of Application Use for Communication Media. The research aim is to describe motives students in SMA 1 Mengwi while using LINE as communication medium. This research used Uses and Gratification theory with a Study Of McQuail’s Media Consuming Motives. Descriptive Quantitative method is usedand data were collected by Question are with 308 students in total. This study found four motives such as, Information Motive, there were Personal Identity Motive, Social Interaction Motive, and Entertainment Motive. Furthermore, Information Motive was the highest in percentage and the Personal Identity Motive was the lowest. Keyword: Instant Messaging, LINE, Motives"

### Keywords
Keyword Not Available

## Downloads:
https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/38737/23490

## Published
2018-04-09

## How To Cite
ADI PRATIWI, Ni Komang; 						AMANDA GELGEL, Ni Made Ras; 						PRADIPTA, Ade Devia.
 MOTIVASI REMAJA DI SMA NEGERI 1 MENGWI MENGGUNAKAN APLIKASI LINE SEBAGAI MEDIA KOMUNIKASI.
E-Jurnal Medium, [S.l.], v. 1, n. 2, apr. 2018.
Available at: &lt;https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/38737&gt;. Date accessed: 14 feb. 2024.

## Citation Format Options:
ABNT, APA, BibTeX, CBE, EndNote - EndNote format (Macintosh & Windows), MLA, ProCite - RIS format (Macintosh & Windows), RefWorks, Reference Manager - RIS format (Windows only), Turabian

## Issue
Vol 1 No 2 (2018)
