---
layout: post
title: "Hubungan Terpaan Media SosialInstagram @exploreBali Dengan Niat Berwisata Followers @exploreBali ke Bali"
author: "Bella Christy, I Gusti Agung Alit Suryawati, Ade Devia Pradipta"
description: ABSTRACT In this era of increasingly sophisticated technology humans no longer spread information only through printed media But also through the internet media One o
categories: komunikasi
tags: Social Media Exposure, Instagram, @exploreBali, Travel Intentions. Correlations
---

## Authors:
Bella Christy, I Gusti Agung Alit Suryawati, Ade Devia Pradipta

## Abstract:
"ABSTRACT In this era of increasingly sophisticated technology, humans no longer spread information only through printed media. But also through the internet media. One of them is social media like @exploreBali, an Instagram account that inform Bali’s tourist destinations. The purpose of this study was to determine the correlation between exposure of @exploreBali social media Instagram with the intention of @exploreBali’s Instagram followers to visit Bali. This research uses quantitative method. Sampling technique used in this research is non-probability sampling and the method is purposive samplng. Data were obtained by distributing questionnaires. The results showed that there is a correlation between exposure of @exploreBali social media Instagram with the intention of @explorebali followers to visit Bali. The direction of correlation between the variables of @exploreBali Social Media Instagram with @exploreBali followers intention to travel to Bali is known to be positive and unidirectional. Which means the more frequent @exploreBali’s followers is exposed to @exploreBali social media Instagramthen the intention of @exploreBali’s followers to travel to Bali will be higher. On the other hand, this research shows only the conviction indicator is high, while the purchase indicator is relatively low. Keywords: Social Media Exposure, Instagram, @exploreBali, Travel Intentions. Correlations"

### Keywords
Social Media Exposure, Instagram, @exploreBali, Travel Intentions. Correlations

## Downloads:
Download Not Available Yet

## Published
2018-02-01

## How To Cite
CHRISTY, Bella; 						ALIT SURYAWATI, I Gusti Agung; 						PRADIPTA, Ade Devia.
 Hubungan Terpaan Media SosialInstagram @exploreBali Dengan Niat Berwisata Followers @exploreBali ke Bali.
E-Jurnal Medium, [S.l.], v. 1, n. 1, feb. 2018.
Available at: &lt;https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/37409&gt;. Date accessed: 14 feb. 2024.

## Citation Format Options:
ABNT, APA, BibTeX, CBE, EndNote - EndNote format (Macintosh & Windows), MLA, ProCite - RIS format (Macintosh & Windows), RefWorks, Reference Manager - RIS format (Windows only), Turabian

## Issue
Vol 1 No 1 (2018)
