---
layout: post
title: "Motif dan Kepuasan Masyarakat Kota Denpasar dalam Mengakses Portal Berita detikcom"
author: "Ni Kadek Diah Ayu Safitri, I Gusti Agug Alit Suryawati, Ni Made Ras Amanda Gelgel"
description: ABSTRACT detikcom is the most popular news portal in Indonesia which is accessed by more than 87 million Indonesians in a month This7research7was7conducted7to7find7out
categories: komunikasi
tags: Denpasar, detikcom, Motives, Satisfaction, Society
---

## Authors:
Ni Kadek Diah Ayu Safitri, I Gusti Agug Alit Suryawati, Ni Made Ras Amanda Gelgel

## Abstract:
"ABSTRACT detikcom is the most popular news portal in Indonesia which is accessed by more than 8.7 million Indonesians in a month. This7research7was7conducted7to7find7out7what7the motives and how the satisfaction the people of Denpasar in accessing detikcom. This study uses the TheoryIof1Uses and.Gratifications. The’type of this research is descriptive quantative method and the[samplingVtechniquesusedIwasJpurposive,sampling /technique. The.analytical technique:used in this research is descriptive statistics by looking at the mean score obtained of each motives and satisfaction the people of Denpasar in accessing detikcom. The result from this research showed, all of these four motives that can be satisfied by accessing detikcom. Keywords: Denpasar, detikcom, Motives, Satisfaction, Society"

### Keywords
Denpasar, detikcom, Motives, Satisfaction, Society

## Downloads:
https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/52557/31048

## Published
2019-08-30

## How To Cite
AYU SAFITRI, Ni Kadek Diah; 						ALIT SURYAWATI, I Gusti Agug; 						AMANDA GELGEL, Ni Made Ras.
 Motif dan Kepuasan Masyarakat Kota Denpasar dalam Mengakses Portal Berita detikcom.
E-Jurnal Medium, [S.l.], v. 1, n. 2, aug. 2019.
Available at: &lt;https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/52557&gt;. Date accessed: 14 feb. 2024.

## Citation Format Options:
ABNT, APA, BibTeX, CBE, EndNote - EndNote format (Macintosh & Windows), MLA, ProCite - RIS format (Macintosh & Windows), RefWorks, Reference Manager - RIS format (Windows only), Turabian

## Issue
Vol 1 No 2 (2019)
