---
layout: post
title: "MAKNA SIMBOL WAYANG KEBO DALAM KAIN TENUN GRINGSING DESA TENGANAN PEGRINGSINGAN KARANGASEM BALI"
author: "Ni Wayan Apriliani, Ni Luh Ramaswati Purnawan, Ni Made Ras Amanda Gelgel"
description: ABSTRACT Gringsing Fabric is a woven fabric with double tied model which is very unique This Fabric only exists in three countries India Japan and Indonesia in Tengan
categories: komunikasi
tags: Meaning of symbols, Semiotics, Woven Fabric, Gringsing Wayang Kebo Pattern
---

## Authors:
Ni Wayan Apriliani, Ni Luh Ramaswati Purnawan, Ni Made Ras Amanda Gelgel

## Abstract:
"ABSTRACT Gringsing Fabric is a woven fabric with double tied model which is very unique. This Fabric only exists in three countries India, Japan and Indonesia, in Tenganan Pegringsingan village. This study attempts to find the symbol meaning which is available on the Gringsing Wayang Kebo woven fabric in Tenganan Pegringsingan. Symbolsin the form of motives and color which contained in the Gringsing Wayang Kebo woven fabric, will be analyzed using the Roland Barthes Semiotic Theory in which there are denotation, connotation and myth in it. The results showed that there is symbol meaning in the motive and the color of the Gringsing Wayang Kebo woven fabric, which contained the balanced life meaning in Tenganan, in which the people love and respect each other without differentiate caste and gender.Tenganan people have beliefs of Rwa Bhineda. Keywords: Meaning of symbols, Semiotics, Woven Fabric, Gringsing Wayang Kebo Pattern"

### Keywords
Meaning of symbols, Semiotics, Woven Fabric, Gringsing Wayang Kebo Pattern

## Downloads:
https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/50162/29859

## Published
2019-06-18

## How To Cite
APRILIANI, Ni Wayan; 						PURNAWAN, Ni Luh Ramaswati; 						AMANDA GELGEL, Ni Made Ras.
 MAKNA SIMBOL WAYANG KEBO DALAM KAIN TENUN GRINGSING DESA TENGANAN PEGRINGSINGAN KARANGASEM BALI.
E-Jurnal Medium, [S.l.], v. 1, n. 1, june 2019.
Available at: &lt;https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/50162&gt;. Date accessed: 14 feb. 2024.

## Citation Format Options:
ABNT, APA, BibTeX, CBE, EndNote - EndNote format (Macintosh & Windows), MLA, ProCite - RIS format (Macintosh & Windows), RefWorks, Reference Manager - RIS format (Windows only), Turabian

## Issue
Vol 1 No 1 (2019)
