---
layout: post
title: "KONSTRUKSI KECANTIKAN PEREMPUAN DALAM  IKLAN DOVE VERSI BERAGAM KECANTIKAN SATU INDONESIA"
author: "Putu Ayu Santika Dewi, I Gusti Agung Alit Suryawati, Ni Nyoman Dewi Pascarani"
description: ABSTRACT Advertisement is a form of activity to promote an idea product or service that is conveyed by persuasion one of them is by showing the aesthetic beauty of wo
categories: komunikasi

---

## Authors:
Putu Ayu Santika Dewi, I Gusti Agung Alit Suryawati, Ni Nyoman Dewi Pascarani

## Abstract:
"ABSTRACT Advertisement is a form of activity to promote an idea, product, or service that is conveyed by persuasion, one of them is by showing the aesthetic beauty of women. Beauty is pictured as a woman with slim waist, fair skin, and with long dark straight hair. However, the stereotype of beauty has been changing these days as shown in a Doveadvertisement Beragam Kecantikan Satu Indonesia version. By using qualitative research methods with the constructivist paradigm and Roland Barthes’ semiotics analysis, the researcher found a different construction of beauty in a Doveadvertisement Beragam Kecantikan Satu Indonesia version. The concept of beauty that is constructed in this advertisement refers to variety of women&#x27;s beauty. It can be seen at the variety of sizes, hair styles, skin color, and age that is portrayed in this advertisement. This shows that the post-modern concept of beauty is referring to plurality, heterogeneity, and very subjective. Key Words : Advertisement, Beauty, Construction, Women, Semiotics"

### Keywords
Keyword Not Available

## Downloads:
https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/48137/28731

## Published
2019-04-10

## How To Cite
SANTIKA DEWI, Putu Ayu; 						ALIT SURYAWATI, I Gusti Agung; 						PASCARANI, Ni Nyoman Dewi.
 KONSTRUKSI KECANTIKAN PEREMPUAN DALAM  IKLAN DOVE VERSI BERAGAM KECANTIKAN SATU INDONESIA.
E-Jurnal Medium, [S.l.], v. 1, n. 1, apr. 2019.
Available at: &lt;https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/48137&gt;. Date accessed: 14 feb. 2024.

## Citation Format Options:
ABNT, APA, BibTeX, CBE, EndNote - EndNote format (Macintosh & Windows), MLA, ProCite - RIS format (Macintosh & Windows), RefWorks, Reference Manager - RIS format (Windows only), Turabian

## Issue
Vol 1 No 1 (2019)
