---
layout: post
title: "REPRESENTASI MASKULINITAS DALAM FILM &amp;ldquo;BOHEMIAN RHAPSODY&amp;rdquo; (ANALISIS SEMIOTIKA CHARLES SANDERS PEIRCE)"
author: "Ni Made Ayu Dwi Eva Irene, I Dewa Ayu Sugiarica Joni, Ni Made Ras Amanda Gelgel"
description: ABSTRACT Film is a mass media that presents reality through certain codes and symbols in audiovisual form There are still many messages contained in a film containing l
categories: komunikasi
tags: Bohemian Rhapsody Film, 1980 Masculinity, Representation, Semiotics Peirce
---

## Authors:
Ni Made Ayu Dwi Eva Irene, I Dewa Ayu Sugiarica Joni, Ni Made Ras Amanda Gelgel

## Abstract:
"ABSTRACT Film is a mass media that presents reality through certain codes and symbols in audiovisual form. There are still many messages contained in a film containing lame gender representations. One of them is the representation of masculinity. In the Bohemian Rhapsody film, Freddie Mercury is portrayed as a man who is metrosexual, likes a luxurious and elegant lifestyle, and is flamboyant. Therefore the aim of the study is to explain the representation of masculinity in the Bohemian Rhapsody film. This study uses a descriptive-qualitative approach with an interpretive constructivist paradigm with Peirce&#x27;s semiotic analysis method. The result of this study indicates that the representation of masculinity reflected in this film is the masculinity of the 1980s. Freddie Mercury&#x27;s masculinity of the 1980s was reflected in his metrosexual figure, lavish and elegant lifestyle, and flamboyance in the film. Keywords:Bohemian Rhapsody Film,1980 Masculinity, Representation, Semiotics Peirce"

### Keywords
Bohemian Rhapsody Film, 1980 Masculinity, Representation, Semiotics Peirce

## Downloads:
https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/53335/31555

## Published
2019-09-25

## How To Cite
EVA IRENE, Ni Made Ayu Dwi; 						SUGIARICA JONI, I Dewa Ayu; 						AMANDA GELGEL, Ni Made Ras.
 REPRESENTASI MASKULINITAS DALAM FILM “BOHEMIAN RHAPSODY” (ANALISIS SEMIOTIKA CHARLES SANDERS PEIRCE).
E-Jurnal Medium, [S.l.], v. 1, n. 2, sep. 2019.
Available at: &lt;https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/53335&gt;. Date accessed: 14 feb. 2024.

## Citation Format Options:
ABNT, APA, BibTeX, CBE, EndNote - EndNote format (Macintosh & Windows), MLA, ProCite - RIS format (Macintosh & Windows), RefWorks, Reference Manager - RIS format (Windows only), Turabian

## Issue
Vol 1 No 2 (2019)
