---
layout: post
title: "HUBUNGAN TERPAANTVLOG TUTORIAL MAKE.UP DI YOUTUBE TERHADAP MINAT BELAJAR MAKE UP REMAJA KOTA DENPASAR"
author: "I Gusti Ayu Rara Nendissa Hermawan, I Gusti Agung Alit Suryawati, Ade Devia Pradipta"
description: ABSTRACT YouTube as a medium for channeling peoples creativity It can also be conducted through the internet one of them is through make up tutorial vlog on YouTube in
categories: komunikasi
tags: Correlation, Interest to Learn, Makeup Tutorial Vlog Exposure, YouTube
---

## Authors:
I Gusti Ayu Rara Nendissa Hermawan, I Gusti Agung Alit Suryawati, Ade Devia Pradipta

## Abstract:
"ABSTRACT YouTube as a medium for channeling people’s creativity, It can also be conducted through the internet one of them is through make up tutorial vlog on YouTube in which the contents usually contain complete information steps to apply makeup. Purpose of this research is to study the correlation of exposure towards makeup tutorial vlog on YouTube towards the interest to learn makeup on Denpasar teenagers. This research uses quantitative method. The sample collecting method is non-probability sampling. Data is obtained through questionnaire. The result of this research showed that the correlation of exposure towards makeup tutorial vlog on YouTube towards the interest to learn makeup on Denpasar teenagers indicated as positive and in the same direction, meaning that the more exposed Denpasar teenagers to makeup tutorial vlog on YouTube, the higher the interest of Denpasar teenagers to learn makeup. Keywords: Correlation, Interest to Learn, Makeup Tutorial Vlog Exposure, YouTube"

### Keywords
Correlation, Interest to Learn, Makeup Tutorial Vlog Exposure, YouTube

## Downloads:
https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/50785/30073

## Published
2019-07-02

## How To Cite
NENDISSA HERMAWAN, I Gusti Ayu Rara; 						ALIT SURYAWATI, I Gusti Agung; 						PRADIPTA, Ade Devia.
 HUBUNGAN TERPAANTVLOG TUTORIAL MAKE.UP DI YOUTUBE TERHADAP MINAT BELAJAR MAKE UP REMAJA KOTA DENPASAR.
E-Jurnal Medium, [S.l.], v. 1, n. 1, july 2019.
Available at: &lt;https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/50785&gt;. Date accessed: 14 feb. 2024.

## Citation Format Options:
ABNT, APA, BibTeX, CBE, EndNote - EndNote format (Macintosh & Windows), MLA, ProCite - RIS format (Macintosh & Windows), RefWorks, Reference Manager - RIS format (Windows only), Turabian

## Issue
Vol 1 No 1 (2019)
