---
layout: post
title: "ANALISIS ISI BERITA KEKERASAN SEKSUAL TRIBUNNEWS.COM (Periode Berita Desember 2018)"
author: "I Gusti Ayu Sri Hartari, Ni Made Ras Amanda Gelgel, Ni Luh Ramaswati Purnawan"
description: ABSTRACT This is aimed at studying the tendency of sexual violence news materials on Tribunnewscom This research uses the normative theory method on mass media as wel
categories: komunikasi
tags: content analysis, news, sexual violence, Tribunnews.com
---

## Authors:
I Gusti Ayu Sri Hartari, Ni Made Ras Amanda Gelgel, Ni Luh Ramaswati Purnawan

## Abstract:
"ABSTRACT This is aimed at studying the tendency of sexual violence news materials on Tribunnews.com. This research uses the normative theory method on mass media, as well as the quantitative content analysis method with descriptive approach. Data was obtained from the coding results of sexual violence news for the period of December 2018. The result of this research shows that Tribunnews.com had the tendency to publish the news of sexual violence, mainly news regarding unlawful sexual intercourse. Tribunnews.com also has the tendency to reveal victim&#x27;s identity and mixing opinion and facts in writing news articles regarding sexual violence which is against the codes of ethical journalism. In the category of victim&#x27;s rights, Tribunnews.com also did not follow the guidelines by having the tendency of using biased diction in writing news articles about sexual violence. Keywords: content analysis, news, sexual violence, Tribunnews.com"

### Keywords
content analysis, news, sexual violence, Tribunnews.com

## Downloads:
https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/52423/30961

## Published
2019-08-27

## How To Cite
SRI HARTARI, I Gusti Ayu; 						AMANDA GELGEL, Ni Made Ras; 						PURNAWAN, Ni Luh Ramaswati.
 ANALISIS ISI BERITA KEKERASAN SEKSUAL TRIBUNNEWS.COM (Periode Berita Desember 2018).
E-Jurnal Medium, [S.l.], v. 1, n. 2, aug. 2019.
Available at: &lt;https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/52423&gt;. Date accessed: 14 feb. 2024.

## Citation Format Options:
ABNT, APA, BibTeX, CBE, EndNote - EndNote format (Macintosh & Windows), MLA, ProCite - RIS format (Macintosh & Windows), RefWorks, Reference Manager - RIS format (Windows only), Turabian

## Issue
Vol 1 No 2 (2019)
