---
layout: post
title: "Tingkat Kesiapan Penggunaan Teknologi Pengemudi Layanan Transportasi Online Go-Jek Di Bali"
author: "David Yohanes Manurung, Ni Nyoman Dewi Pascarani, Ade Devia Pradipta"
description: ABSTRACT The height of Indonesian internet users using smartphones is the reason for Gojeks online transportation service to emerge Gojek is a taxi booking through a
categories: komunikasi
tags: Driver, Go-jek, Online Transportation, Technology Readiness
---

## Authors:
David Yohanes Manurung, Ni Nyoman Dewi Pascarani, Ade Devia Pradipta

## Abstract:
"ABSTRACT The height of Indonesian internet users using smartphones is the reason for Go-jek’s online transportation service to emerge. Go-jek is a taxi booking through a smartphone application that can be downloaded. Go-jek is expected to provide solutions and to address public concerns about the public transportation service. The goal of this research is to learn driver’s technology readiness using Go-jek application. Using the concept of technology readiness index and a quantitative approach of research, the result of this research that Go-jek drivers in Bali are explorers type of the five types of technology customers. Research show the driver has a positive view of Go-jek application. Drivers had the motivation and confidence to use technology and often learned much about new technologies. So, Go-jek drivers in Bali had no problem using the application that communication on the part of Go-jek drivers with the customers is going well. Keywords: Driver, Go-jek, Online Transportation, Technology Readiness"

### Keywords
Driver, Go-jek, Online Transportation, Technology Readiness

## Downloads:
https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/50856/30124

## Published
2019-07-04

## How To Cite
MANURUNG, David Yohanes; 						PASCARANI, Ni Nyoman Dewi; 						PRADIPTA, Ade Devia.
 Tingkat Kesiapan Penggunaan Teknologi Pengemudi Layanan Transportasi Online Go-Jek Di Bali.
E-Jurnal Medium, [S.l.], v. 1, n. 1, july 2019.
Available at: &lt;https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/50856&gt;. Date accessed: 14 feb. 2024.

## Citation Format Options:
ABNT, APA, BibTeX, CBE, EndNote - EndNote format (Macintosh & Windows), MLA, ProCite - RIS format (Macintosh & Windows), RefWorks, Reference Manager - RIS format (Windows only), Turabian

## Issue
Vol 1 No 1 (2019)
