---
layout: post
title: "Rekonstruksi Perjuangan Zapatista Di Meksiko Dalam Lagu Bayang Tak Berwajah Oleh Geekssmile"
author: "Arya Pramana Kusuma, Ni Made Ras Amanda Gelgel, Ni Nyoman Dewi Pascarani"
description: ABSTRACT The purpose of this research to determine thereconstruction of the zapatista struggle in Bayang Tak Berwajah music lyric from band named Geekssmile  This rease
categories: komunikasi
tags: Geekssmile, semiotic, message, music lyric
---

## Authors:
Arya Pramana Kusuma, Ni Made Ras Amanda Gelgel, Ni Nyoman Dewi Pascarani

## Abstract:
"ABSTRACT The purpose of this research to determine thereconstruction of the zapatista struggle in Bayang Tak Berwajah music lyric from band named Geekssmile . This reasearch uses a qualitative semiotic approach. The technique of determining informants in this study used a purposive technique. Data obtained through in-depth interviews, and documentation. Data analysis techniques used are data reduction, data presentation, and conclusion. Geekssmile wants to spread the message about how the negative impact of an armed conflict. Geekssmile wants to educate they listeners that war is a bad thing and must be avoided, because it only brings obscurity and evil. So that the listeners are not easily provoked and carried away in a of unfavorable conflict. Keywords: Geekssmile, semiotic, message, music lyric"

### Keywords
Geekssmile, semiotic, message, music lyric

## Downloads:
https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/50818/30088

## Published
2019-07-03

## How To Cite
KUSUMA, Arya Pramana; 						AMANDA GELGEL, Ni Made Ras; 						DEWI PASCARANI, Ni Nyoman.
 Rekonstruksi Perjuangan Zapatista Di Meksiko Dalam Lagu Bayang Tak Berwajah Oleh Geekssmile.
E-Jurnal Medium, [S.l.], v. 1, n. 1, july 2019.
Available at: &lt;https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/50818&gt;. Date accessed: 14 feb. 2024.

## Citation Format Options:
ABNT, APA, BibTeX, CBE, EndNote - EndNote format (Macintosh & Windows), MLA, ProCite - RIS format (Macintosh & Windows), RefWorks, Reference Manager - RIS format (Windows only), Turabian

## Issue
Vol 1 No 1 (2019)
