---
layout: post
title: "Komunikasi Antar Pribadi Anak dengan Orang Tua Beda Agama di Denpasar"
author: "Ni Nyoman Cita Praasada, I Gusti Agung Alit Suryawati, Ni Made Ras Amanda Gelgel"
description: ABSTRACT Through interpersonal communication communicants can interact with others and express themselves to others In families there are often differences of opinio
categories: komunikasi
tags: Communication Pattern, Interpersonal Communication, Religion
---

## Authors:
Ni Nyoman Cita Praasada, I Gusti Agung Alit Suryawati, Ni Made Ras Amanda Gelgel

## Abstract:
"ABSTRACT Through interpersonal communication, communicants can interact with others, and express themselves to others. In families, there are often differences of opinion or different ways of communicating between parents and children, and similarly with children who have parents of different religions. The purpose.of this study.aims to.find.out how to form. interpersonal communication between children with interfaith parents in Denpasar City. The analytical technique used in the study through several stages, namely the calculation of the average analysis techniques and conclusions. The.results.showed.that even though.there.were differences in. age and religion with their parents, it did not prevent children from their parents from being able to have an attitude of openness, empathy, freedom of expressing ideas between children and parents with different beliefs. Keywords: Communication Pattern, Interpersonal Communication, Religion"

### Keywords
Communication Pattern, Interpersonal Communication, Religion

## Downloads:
https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/48413/28865

## Published
2019-04-16

## How To Cite
PRAASADA, Ni Nyoman Cita; 						SURYAWATI, I Gusti Agung Alit; 						GELGEL, Ni Made Ras Amanda.
 Komunikasi Antar Pribadi Anak dengan Orang Tua Beda Agama di Denpasar.
E-Jurnal Medium, [S.l.], v. 1, n. 1, apr. 2019.
Available at: &lt;https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/48413&gt;. Date accessed: 14 feb. 2024.

## Citation Format Options:
ABNT, APA, BibTeX, CBE, EndNote - EndNote format (Macintosh & Windows), MLA, ProCite - RIS format (Macintosh & Windows), RefWorks, Reference Manager - RIS format (Windows only), Turabian

## Issue
Vol 1 No 1 (2019)
