---
layout: post
title: "Pengaruh Terpaan Berita Pilgub Bali di Instagram @tribunbali terhadap Partisipasi Politik Pemilih Pemula di Kabupaten Tabanan dalam Pilkada 2018"
author: "I Putu Kumara Wiguna, Ni Made Ras Amanda Gelgel, Ade Devia Pradipta"
description: ABSTRACTd In 2018 the election of governor and deputy governor ofcBali for the period of 20182023 was conducted Tabanan Regency has the highest electoral participatio
categories: komunikasi
tags: Instagram, Wpolitical participation, Wnovice voters, newsIexposure, usesPand effects theory
---

## Authors:
I Putu Kumara Wiguna, Ni Made Ras Amanda Gelgel, Ade Devia Pradipta

## Abstract:
"ABSTRACTd In 2018, the election of governor and deputy governor ofcBali for the period of 2018-2023 was conducted. Tabanan Regency has the highest electoral participation rate of 81.34%. This research aims to see how Instagram @tribunbali influence the political participation of the novice voters in Tabanan Regency. This research uses quantitative explanatory methods with uses and effects theory. The data analysis technique is a simple linearwregression analysis with SPSS 18 program. The results of this research showed the news of the election of governor and deputywgovernorwof Bali 2018 on Instagram @tribunbali have a positive influence on the political participation of novice voters in Tabanan Regency. When the news of the governor and deputy governor of Bali election on Instagram @tribunbali increased, political participation of novice voters in Tabanan Regency is getting higher. Keywords: Instagram,Wpolitical participation,Wnovice voters, newsIexposure, usesPand effects theory"

### Keywords
Instagram, Wpolitical participation, Wnovice voters, newsIexposure, usesPand effects theory

## Downloads:
https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/50802/30082

## Published
2019-07-03

## How To Cite
WIGUNA, I Putu Kumara; 						AMANDA GELGEL, Ni Made Ras; 						PRADIPTA, Ade Devia.
 Pengaruh Terpaan Berita Pilgub Bali di Instagram @tribunbali terhadap Partisipasi Politik Pemilih Pemula di Kabupaten Tabanan dalam Pilkada 2018.
E-Jurnal Medium, [S.l.], v. 1, n. 1, july 2019.
Available at: &lt;https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/50802&gt;. Date accessed: 14 feb. 2024.

## Citation Format Options:
ABNT, APA, BibTeX, CBE, EndNote - EndNote format (Macintosh & Windows), MLA, ProCite - RIS format (Macintosh & Windows), RefWorks, Reference Manager - RIS format (Windows only), Turabian

## Issue
Vol 1 No 1 (2019)
