---
layout: post
title: "STUDI KOMPARATIF TINGKAT KEPUASAN DALAM MEMBACA KORAN HARIAN TRIBUN BALI DAN PORTAL BERITA BALI.TRIBUNNEWS.COM  PADA MASYARAKAT KOTA DENPASAR"
author: "Arif Juhendri, I Gusti Agung Alit Suryawati, Ade Devia Pradipta"
description: ABSTRACT Daily Tribune Bali and Balitribunnewscom experienced media convergence This research aims to know the motives and satisfaction Denpasar is recorded as the m
categories: komunikasi

---

## Authors:
Arif Juhendri, I Gusti Agung Alit Suryawati, Ade Devia Pradipta

## Abstract:
"ABSTRACT Daily Tribune Bali and Bali.tribunnews.com experienced media convergence. This research aims to know the motives and satisfaction. Denpasar is recorded as the most used nternet and the most media consumption in Bali. The pattern of media consumption that is a reference is the1motive by McQuail. The theory is the Uses and Gratifications theory. Using qualitative methods of descriptive. Sampling techniques are purposive1sampling. Data obtained by spreading the questionnaire Likert1scale. Analytical techniques are descriptive statistics with the average1score of1motives and satisfaction. The results of the study there are no motives1that are satisfied1with reading Daily Tribune Bali. Then only one motive is able to be satisfied in reading the news portal Bali.tribunnews.com is an entertainment motif. So the result of this1research shows the daily reader of Tribune Bali or Bali.tribunnews.com news Portal can,t be said as a fairly effective medium to give satisfaction. Keyword: Community,Denpasar, Motive, Satisfaction, Society, Tribun"

### Keywords
Keyword Not Available

## Downloads:
https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/55808/32969

## Published
2019-12-31

## How To Cite
JUHENDRI, Arif; 						ALIT SURYAWATI, I Gusti Agung; 						PRADIPTA, Ade Devia.
 STUDI KOMPARATIF TINGKAT KEPUASAN DALAM MEMBACA KORAN HARIAN TRIBUN BALI DAN PORTAL BERITA BALI.TRIBUNNEWS.COM  PADA MASYARAKAT KOTA DENPASAR.
E-Jurnal Medium, [S.l.], v. 1, n. 2, dec. 2019.
Available at: &lt;https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/55808&gt;. Date accessed: 14 feb. 2024.

## Citation Format Options:
ABNT, APA, BibTeX, CBE, EndNote - EndNote format (Macintosh & Windows), MLA, ProCite - RIS format (Macintosh & Windows), RefWorks, Reference Manager - RIS format (Windows only), Turabian

## Issue
Vol 1 No 2 (2019)
