---
layout: post
title: "Hubungan Terpaan Iklan Imagine Your Korea Dengan Minat Berkunjung Masyarakat Denpasar"
author: "Stephanie Gunawan Putri, Ni Luh Ramaswati Purnawan, I Gusti Agung Alit Suryawati"
description: ABSTRACT The development of Korean Wave that spread rapidly throughout the world made South Korea utilize this phenomenon to develop their tourism sector Indonesia as t
categories: komunikasi
tags: Imagine Your Korea, Intention to visit, Media Exposure, Tourism.
---

## Authors:
Stephanie Gunawan Putri, Ni Luh Ramaswati Purnawan, I Gusti Agung Alit Suryawati

## Abstract:
"ABSTRACT The development of Korean Wave that spread rapidly throughout the world made South Korea utilize this phenomenon to develop their tourism sector. Indonesia as the largest Korean Wave market in Southeast Asia became opportunity for South Korea to promote their tourism. The promotion is uploaded to YouTube to reach audiences. This study is aimed to determine the relationship between exposures of 8 Faces of Korea, 8 Types of Trip tourism advertisement with interest of Denpasar citizen. The sampling method in this research is non-probability purposive-sampling. Primary data was collected through questionnaires distributed to respondents aged 19 to 39 who had seen the advertisements at least once. This study shows that advertisement exposure has a significant and quite strong relationship with the interest of visiting. Relationship between the two variables is unidirectional, which means the more exposure happens to audience, the higher interest to visit. Keywords: Imagine Your Korea, Intention to visit, Media Exposure, Tourism."

### Keywords
Imagine Your Korea, Intention to visit, Media Exposure, Tourism.

## Downloads:
https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/52563/31050

## Published
2019-08-30

## How To Cite
GUNAWAN PUTRI, Stephanie; 						PURNAWAN, Ni Luh Ramaswati; 						ALIT SURYAWATI, I Gusti Agung.
 Hubungan Terpaan Iklan Imagine Your Korea Dengan Minat Berkunjung Masyarakat Denpasar.
E-Jurnal Medium, [S.l.], v. 1, n. 2, aug. 2019.
Available at: &lt;https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/52563&gt;. Date accessed: 14 feb. 2024.

## Citation Format Options:
ABNT, APA, BibTeX, CBE, EndNote - EndNote format (Macintosh & Windows), MLA, ProCite - RIS format (Macintosh & Windows), RefWorks, Reference Manager - RIS format (Windows only), Turabian

## Issue
Vol 1 No 2 (2019)
