---
layout: post
title: "ANALISIS FRAMING KONTROVERSI ARCANDRATAHAR DALAM PORTAL BERITA ONLINE DETIK.COM"
author: "I Gusti Agung Putu Anggara Putra, Ni Made Ras Amanda Gelgel, Ni Luh Ramaswati Purnawan"
description: ABSTRACT There was controversy of Arcandra Tahar that dismissed as minister by Jokowi because of dual nationality On 15 August 2016 but then on October 14 Arcandra was 
categories: komunikasi
tags: framing, controversy, Arcandra Tahar, detik.com
---

## Authors:
I Gusti Agung Putu Anggara Putra, Ni Made Ras Amanda Gelgel, Ni Luh Ramaswati Purnawan

## Abstract:
"ABSTRACT There was controversy of Arcandra Tahar that dismissed as minister by Jokowi because of dual nationality On 15 August 2016, but then on October 14 Arcandra was appointed again as vice minister of ESDM on the kabinet kerja .The goal of this research is to describe how the issue was framed by detik.com. this research is using descriptive qualitative Approach. Data resource are the news in the online media detik.com from 13 August 2016 until 15 October 2016. The Method that used in this research is framing analysis by Robert N. Entman. The analysis is divide in 4 phase there are: (1) define problem, (2) diagnose causes, (3) make moral judgment, (4) treatment recommendation. The result of this research is news about the issue of Arcandra Tahar at the ministry on online media detik.com tend to be about criticism of the president Joko Widodo’s decision. Keywords:framing, controversy, Arcandra Tahar, detik.com"

### Keywords
framing, controversy, Arcandra Tahar, detik.com

## Downloads:
https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/50460/29953

## Published
2019-06-25

## How To Cite
ANGGARA PUTRA, I Gusti Agung Putu; 						AMANDA GELGEL, Ni Made Ras; 						PURNAWAN, Ni Luh Ramaswati.
 ANALISIS FRAMING KONTROVERSI ARCANDRATAHAR DALAM PORTAL BERITA ONLINE DETIK.COM.
E-Jurnal Medium, [S.l.], v. 1, n. 1, june 2019.
Available at: &lt;https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/50460&gt;. Date accessed: 14 feb. 2024.

## Citation Format Options:
ABNT, APA, BibTeX, CBE, EndNote - EndNote format (Macintosh & Windows), MLA, ProCite - RIS format (Macintosh & Windows), RefWorks, Reference Manager - RIS format (Windows only), Turabian

## Issue
Vol 1 No 1 (2019)
