---
layout: post
title: "REPRESENTASI PEREMPUAN DALAM IKLAN SUSU JAHE SIDO MUNCUL VERSI SIDO SUSU"
author: "Ni Nyoman Irafani Dyah Ratmasanti, Ni Luh Ramaswati Purnawan, Ade Devia Pradipta"
description: ABSTRACT Susu Jahe Sido Muncul Sido Susu version is an advertisement that illustrates how the mass media still uses sensuality and exploitation of women as a means to at
categories: komunikasi
tags: Exploitation of Women, Representation of Women, Semiotics, Advertisement
---

## Authors:
Ni Nyoman Irafani Dyah Ratmasanti, Ni Luh Ramaswati Purnawan, Ade Devia Pradipta

## Abstract:
"ABSTRACT Susu Jahe Sido Muncul Sido Susu version is an advertisement that illustrates how the mass media still uses sensuality and exploitation of women as a means to attract the attention of the audience. This ad contains information about the &quot;Undian Berhadiah Sido Susu&quot;, where Cupi Cupita as the brand ambassador conveys that information. Submission of information is accompanied by Cupi Cupita’s scene that moves the breast and hips This study used the analysis of Charles Peirce&#x27;s semiotics by analyzing the objects contained in the sign shown by Cupi Cupita who represent women in this advertisement. Some supporting attributes such as the use of tight red clothing that contains sexual meanings, and seductive body language are added to further strengthen the impression of sensuality in this ad. The sensuality of women also directs the stereotype of women as sexual objects. Keywords: Exploitation of Women, Representation of Women, Semiotics, Advertisement"

### Keywords
Exploitation of Women, Representation of Women, Semiotics, Advertisement

## Downloads:
https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/58979/34292

## Published
2020-04-13

## How To Cite
DYAH RATMASANTI, Ni Nyoman Irafani; 						PURNAWAN, Ni Luh Ramaswati; 						PRADIPTA, Ade Devia.
 REPRESENTASI PEREMPUAN DALAM IKLAN SUSU JAHE SIDO MUNCUL VERSI SIDO SUSU.
E-Jurnal Medium, [S.l.], v. 1, n. 1, p. 92-104, apr. 2020.
Available at: &lt;https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/58979&gt;. Date accessed: 14 feb. 2024.

## Citation Format Options:
ABNT, APA, BibTeX, CBE, EndNote - EndNote format (Macintosh & Windows), MLA, ProCite - RIS format (Macintosh & Windows), RefWorks, Reference Manager - RIS format (Windows only), Turabian

## Issue
Vol 1 No 1 (2020): Jurnal Ilmu Komunikasi 2020
