---
layout: post
title: "REPRESENTASI RASISME DALAM FILM PENDEK SKIN (ANALISIS SEMIOTIKA ROLAND BARTHES)"
author: "I Gede Anang Duta Prasatya, I Dewa Ayu Sugiarica Joni, Ni Made Ras Amanda Gelgel"
description: ABSTRACT Racism is a belief that considers one racial group to be superior to other racial groups The issue of racism can be presented through films as in the short fi
categories: komunikasi
tags: Racism, Representation, Semiotics, Film
---

## Authors:
I Gede Anang Duta Prasatya, I Dewa Ayu Sugiarica Joni, Ni Made Ras Amanda Gelgel

## Abstract:
"ABSTRACT Racism is a belief that considers one racial group to be superior to other racial groups. The issue of racism can be presented through films, as in the short film Skin. The short film Skin depicts a white group who assault a black man at a convenience store. The purpose of this study is to find out how racism is represented in the short film Skin. This study uses a qualitative approach and analyzed using the semiotic analysis of Roland Barthes which consists of denotations, connotations and myths. The results of this study indicate that the short film Skin represents racism in the form of prejudice, stereotypes and discrimination. Black people receive prejudice as a threat and a criminal, dangerous stereotypes, discrimination in the form of ridicule, use of the terms negro and jigaboo, and assaults against blacks. Keywords: Racism, Representation, Semiotics, Film"

### Keywords
Racism, Representation, Semiotics, Film

## Downloads:
Download Not Available Yet

## Published
2020-09-18

## How To Cite
DUTA PRASATYA, I Gede Anang; 						SUGIARICA JONI, I Dewa Ayu; 						AMANDA GELGEL, Ni Made Ras.
 REPRESENTASI RASISME DALAM FILM PENDEK SKIN (ANALISIS SEMIOTIKA ROLAND BARTHES).
E-Jurnal Medium, [S.l.], v. 1, n. 2, sep. 2020.
Available at: &lt;https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/64150&gt;. Date accessed: 14 feb. 2024.

## Citation Format Options:
ABNT, APA, BibTeX, CBE, EndNote - EndNote format (Macintosh & Windows), MLA, ProCite - RIS format (Macintosh & Windows), RefWorks, Reference Manager - RIS format (Windows only), Turabian

## Issue
Vol 1 No 2 (2021): Jurnal Ilmu Komunikasi 2021
