---
layout: post
title: "ANALISIS PROSES PENGAMBILAN KEPUTUSAN GAMER PADA GAME LIFE IS STRANGE"
author: "Yogi Marta Bramana, Ni Luh Ramaswati Purnawan, Ade Devia Pradipta"
description: ABSTRACT Individuals will be treated to a variety of choices and decisions that must be taken in life Like the decisions taken in the Game whose purpose is for entertai
categories: komunikasi
tags: Decision Making Process, Gamers, Life is Strange, Feelings, Assessment
---

## Authors:
Yogi Marta Bramana, Ni Luh Ramaswati Purnawan, Ade Devia Pradipta

## Abstract:
"ABSTRACT Individuals will be treated to a variety of choices and decisions that must be taken in life. Like the decisions taken in the Game whose purpose is for entertainment. Game is one of the new digital media that has a function as entertainment, and individuals who play games with high intensity of time are called gamers. One game that has a decision making process simulation is Life is Strange. The results indicate Feeling and belief affect the judgment of gamers to the characters in the game Life is Strange. This assessment is a factor that influences how all four gamers make decisions throughout the game. When gamers&#x27; judgment of one character in the game is bad, the decision taken is a decision that will harm the character. Vice versa, if gamers judge the character of the other person is good then the decision taken will be beneficial for the character. Keywords: Decision Making Process, Gamers, Life is Strange, Feelings, Assessment"

### Keywords
Decision Making Process, Gamers, Life is Strange, Feelings, Assessment

## Downloads:
https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/57241/33545

## Published
2020-02-04

## How To Cite
BRAMANA, Yogi Marta; 						PURNAWAN, Ni Luh Ramaswati; 						PRADIPTA, Ade Devia.
 ANALISIS PROSES PENGAMBILAN KEPUTUSAN GAMER PADA GAME LIFE IS STRANGE.
E-Jurnal Medium, [S.l.], v. 1, n. 1, p. 117-128, feb. 2020.
Available at: &lt;https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/57241&gt;. Date accessed: 14 feb. 2024.

## Citation Format Options:
ABNT, APA, BibTeX, CBE, EndNote - EndNote format (Macintosh & Windows), MLA, ProCite - RIS format (Macintosh & Windows), RefWorks, Reference Manager - RIS format (Windows only), Turabian

## Issue
Vol 1 No 1 (2020): Jurnal Ilmu Komunikasi 2020
