---
layout: post
title: "PENGARUH KREDIBILITAS TASYA FARASYA TERHADAP NIAT BELI PRODUK FOCALLURE"
author: "Ni Made Pramoni Dwiartha Cahyani, I Gusti Agung Alit Suryawati, Ade Devia Pradipta"
description: A personx27s credibility affects the communicant to make a product decision The use of beauty vloggers is easier to influence consumersx27 psychology because they
categories: komunikasi
tags: Beauty Vlogger, Credibility, Hierarchy Effects Model, Source Credibility
---

## Authors:
Ni Made Pramoni Dwiartha Cahyani, I Gusti Agung Alit Suryawati, Ade Devia Pradipta

## Abstract:
"A person&#x27;s credibility affects the communicant to make a product decision. The use of beauty vloggers is easier to influence consumers&#x27; psychology because they are individuals who are popular with society. One of the well-known beauty vloggers in Indonesia and has the highest number of subscribers is named Tasya Farasya. Tasya Farasya collaborated with Focallure in creating products by releasing the eyeshadow pallete &quot;THE NEEDS&quot; FOCALLURE X TASYA FARASYA. The purpose1of this study was to explain the.effect.of Tasya Farasya&#x27;s.credibility. on purchase intention of Focallure products among adolescents in Denpasar City. . The results showed that Tasya Fasrasya&#x27;s credibility had a positive influence on the purchase intention of focallure products among adolescents in Denpasar City with a value of 0.536 which was classified as moderate with an influence level of 75% with a sample size of 170 respondents. Keywords: Beauty Vlogger, Credibility, Hierarchy Effects Model, Source Credibility"

### Keywords
Beauty Vlogger, Credibility, Hierarchy Effects Model, Source Credibility

## Downloads:
https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/68462/37772

## Published
2020-12-30

## How To Cite
DWIARTHA CAHYANI, Ni Made Pramoni; 						ALIT SURYAWATI, I Gusti Agung; 						PRADIPTA, Ade Devia.
 PENGARUH KREDIBILITAS TASYA FARASYA TERHADAP NIAT BELI PRODUK FOCALLURE.
E-Jurnal Medium, [S.l.], v. 1, n. 2, p. 110-120, dec. 2020.
Available at: &lt;https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/68462&gt;. Date accessed: 14 feb. 2024.

## Citation Format Options:
ABNT, APA, BibTeX, CBE, EndNote - EndNote format (Macintosh & Windows), MLA, ProCite - RIS format (Macintosh & Windows), RefWorks, Reference Manager - RIS format (Windows only), Turabian

## Issue
Vol 1 No 2 (2021): Jurnal Ilmu Komunikasi 2021
