---
layout: post
title: "AUTISME DALAM SERIAL DRAMA PROJECTS THE SERIES: SIDE BYSIDE"
author: "I Made Krisna Satria Dwipayana, I Dewa Ayu Sugiarica Joni, Ni Made Ras Amanda Gelgel"
description: Film is one of the massiimedia which is used to entertain provide information and other technical presentations to the generaliipublic Film can represent and construc
categories: komunikasi
tags: Charles Sanders Pierce, Semiotics, Autism, Film
---

## Authors:
I Made Krisna Satria Dwipayana, I Dewa Ayu Sugiarica Joni, Ni Made Ras Amanda Gelgel

## Abstract:
"Film is one of the massiimedia which is used to entertain, provide information, and other technical presentations to the generaliipublic. Film can represent and construct social realities that occur in society by using signs to describe something. ProjectiiS The Series: SideiibyiiSide is a film in the form of a series that raises the genre about autism. This research uses descriptive qualitative research by means of CharlesiiSandersiiPeirce&#x27;siisemiotic. The resultsiiofiithis studyiiindicate that this series has the ability to construct reality and describe the realities that occur in society, in this case people with autism. Therefore, in addition to being a reflection of society, this series also shows the other side of the reality of autism, where it not only has obstacles due to autism, but also has advantages that are expected to provide a new perspective on people with autism. Keywords: Charles Sanders Pierce, Semiotics, Autism, Film"

### Keywords
Charles Sanders Pierce, Semiotics, Autism, Film

## Downloads:
https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/68541/37859

## Published
2020-12-31

## How To Cite
SATRIA DWIPAYANA, I Made Krisna; 						SUGIARICA JONI, I Dewa Ayu; 						AMANDA GELGEL, Ni Made Ras.
 AUTISME DALAM SERIAL DRAMA PROJECTS THE SERIES: SIDE BYSIDE.
E-Jurnal Medium, [S.l.], v. 1, n. 2, p. 121-128, dec. 2020.
Available at: &lt;https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/68541&gt;. Date accessed: 14 feb. 2024.

## Citation Format Options:
ABNT, APA, BibTeX, CBE, EndNote - EndNote format (Macintosh & Windows), MLA, ProCite - RIS format (Macintosh & Windows), RefWorks, Reference Manager - RIS format (Windows only), Turabian

## Issue
Vol 1 No 2 (2021): Jurnal Ilmu Komunikasi 2021
