---
layout: post
title: "Pengaruh Terpaan Iklan Akun Instagram @deliciousbali Terhadap Niat Membeli Produk Kuliner di Bali"
author: "Yusma Ayu Sekaringtyas, Ade Devia Pradipta, I Gusti Agung Alit Suryawati"
description: ABSTRACT Deliciousbali is one of the mostfollowed Instagram accounts number 1 in Bali which provides Balinese culinary recommendations which has reached 298000 follow
categories: komunikasi

---

## Authors:
Yusma Ayu Sekaringtyas, Ade Devia Pradipta, I Gusti Agung Alit Suryawati

## Abstract:
"ABSTRACT @Deliciousbali is one of the most-followed Instagram accounts number 1 in Bali which provides Balinese culinary recommendations which has reached 298.000 followers in 2020. This account is not only being used to give some culinary recommendations, but also being used as such a new marketing communications platform to publicy both foods and beverages in Bali with Instagram as its support. In this research, kind of method that has been used is quantitative explanatory with Uses and Effects theory and Hierarcy of Effects Model. This research shows that media exposure in advertising of @deliciousbali has impacted on someone’s purchase intentions with total score of correlation 0,781 given to the right point that these variables are strongly correlated resulting at 60,9 % level of impact. Moreover, the intensity of media exposure and purchase intention are not affected by gender which is shown at its comparison between both variables are nearly the same. Keyword: Instagram, Purchase Intentions, Advertisement Exposure, Uses and Effects."

### Keywords
Keyword Not Available

## Downloads:
https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/61223/35234

## Published
2020-06-26

## How To Cite
SEKARINGTYAS, Yusma Ayu; 						PRADIPTA, Ade Devia; 						ALIT SURYAWATI, I Gusti Agung.
 Pengaruh Terpaan Iklan Akun Instagram @deliciousbali Terhadap Niat Membeli Produk Kuliner di Bali.
E-Jurnal Medium, [S.l.], v. 1, n. 1, p. 72-83, june 2020.
Available at: &lt;https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/61223&gt;. Date accessed: 14 feb. 2024.

## Citation Format Options:
ABNT, APA, BibTeX, CBE, EndNote - EndNote format (Macintosh & Windows), MLA, ProCite - RIS format (Macintosh & Windows), RefWorks, Reference Manager - RIS format (Windows only), Turabian

## Issue
Vol 1 No 1 (2020): Jurnal Ilmu Komunikasi 2020
