---
layout: post
title: "Pengaruh Terpaan Trailer Film Joker Terhadap Keputusan Remaja Untuk Menonton Film Joker Di Bioskop"
author: "Jocelyn Williams Savarino, Ade Devia Pradipta, I Dewa Ayu Sugiarica Joni"
description: ABSTRACT The success of Joker filmx27s gross income about  1073151773 cannot be separated from the effort by the production house Warner Bross Pictures to promote
categories: komunikasi
tags: Joker’s Film Trailer, Teenager’s Decision, Watching The “Joker” Movie In The Cinema, Stimulus Organism Response Theory
---

## Authors:
Jocelyn Williams Savarino, Ade Devia Pradipta, I Dewa Ayu Sugiarica Joni

## Abstract:
"ABSTRACT The success of Joker film&#x27;s gross income about $ 1,073,151,773 cannot be separated from the effort by the production house Warner Bross Pictures to promotes joker film by giving a trailer view on all kind of media platform including social media and some conventional media. The goal of this research is to find about how Joker&#x27;s trailers affect the teenager&#x27;s decision to watching the &quot;Joker&quot; movie in the cinema. This research uses quantitative explanatory methods with the Stimulus Organism Response theory. For the data analysis technique, this research uses a simple linear regression analysis with SPSS 18 program. The result from this research showed us that the “Joker” trailer exposure could affect the teenager’s decision for watching the “Joker” movie in the cinema. Keywords:Joker’s Film Trailer, Teenager’s Decision, Watching The “Joker” Movie In The Cinema, Stimulus Organism Response Theory"

### Keywords
Joker’s Film Trailer, Teenager’s Decision, Watching The “Joker” Movie In The Cinema, Stimulus Organism Response Theory

## Downloads:
https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/61224/35235

## Published
2020-06-26

## How To Cite
SAVARINO, Jocelyn Williams; 						PRADIPTA, Ade Devia; 						SUGIARICA JONI, I Dewa Ayu.
 Pengaruh Terpaan Trailer Film Joker Terhadap Keputusan Remaja Untuk Menonton Film Joker Di Bioskop.
E-Jurnal Medium, [S.l.], v. 1, n. 1, p. 58-71, june 2020.
Available at: &lt;https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/61224&gt;. Date accessed: 14 feb. 2024.

## Citation Format Options:
ABNT, APA, BibTeX, CBE, EndNote - EndNote format (Macintosh & Windows), MLA, ProCite - RIS format (Macintosh & Windows), RefWorks, Reference Manager - RIS format (Windows only), Turabian

## Issue
Vol 1 No 1 (2020): Jurnal Ilmu Komunikasi 2020
