---
layout: post
title: "STRATEGI KOMUNIKASI PEMASARAN TERPADU THE KAYON JUNGLE RESORT DALAM MENINGKATKAN BRAND AWARENESS"
author: "Putu Ratih Aristia Dewi, I Dewa Ayu Sugiarica Joni, Ade Devia Pradipta"
description: The Kayon Jungle Resort is a fivestar resort located in Payangan District Gianyar Regency Bali which has the tagline quotTrully Ubud Escapequot with the brand ima
categories: komunikasi

---

## Authors:
Putu Ratih Aristia Dewi, I Dewa Ayu Sugiarica Joni, Ade Devia Pradipta

## Abstract:
"The Kayon Jungle Resort is a five-star resort located in Payangan District, Gianyar Regency, Bali which has the tagline &quot;Trully Ubud Escape&quot; with the brand image as &quot;The Best Honeymoon Resort&quot;. The purpose of this research is to determine the integrated marketing communication strategy used by The Kayon Jungle Resort in increasing brand awareness. This research uses a descriptive qualitative approach with a post-positivism paradigm. This study used purposive sampling and snowball sampling techniques to determining the informants. Data collected by observation, in-depth interviews and documentation. The results of this research indicate the marketing communication strategy used by The Kayon Jungle Resort in increasing brand awareness by applying the concept of a marketing mix with 4 elements, namely: product, place, price, promotion and promotional mix which consists of of 8 elements, such as advertising, sales promotion, personal selling, direct marketing, interactive marketing, public relations and events. Keyword: Integrated Marketing Communication Strategy, Brand Awareness, The Kayon Jungle Resort, Marketing Mix, Promotional Mix"

### Keywords
Keyword Not Available

## Downloads:
https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/73764/39757

## Published
2021-06-03

## How To Cite
ARISTIA DEWI, Putu Ratih; 						SUGIARICA JONI, I Dewa Ayu; 						PRADIPTA, Ade Devia.
 STRATEGI KOMUNIKASI PEMASARAN TERPADU THE KAYON JUNGLE RESORT DALAM MENINGKATKAN BRAND AWARENESS.
E-Jurnal Medium, [S.l.], v. 1, n. 2, june 2021.
Available at: &lt;https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/73764&gt;. Date accessed: 14 feb. 2024.

## Citation Format Options:
ABNT, APA, BibTeX, CBE, EndNote - EndNote format (Macintosh & Windows), MLA, ProCite - RIS format (Macintosh & Windows), RefWorks, Reference Manager - RIS format (Windows only), Turabian

## Issue
Vol 1 No 2 (2021): Jurnal Ilmu Komunikasi 2021
