---
layout: post
title: "Representasi Nasionalisme dalam Lagu Korea Selatan &amp;ldquo;Dokdoneun Urittang&amp;rdquo; (Dokdo adalah Tanah Kami) Versi Tahun 2017"
author: "Ni Putu Anasthasia Nikki Vernishia, I Dewa Ayu Sugiarica Joni, Ade Devia Pradipta"
description: Songs are universal media that effectively convey messages to a wide audience Dokdoneun Urittang or Dokdo is our land is one of the South Korean songs which is not on
categories: komunikasi
tags: Representation, nationalism, South Korea
---

## Authors:
Ni Putu Anasthasia Nikki Vernishia, I Dewa Ayu Sugiarica Joni, Ade Devia Pradipta

## Abstract:
"Songs are universal media that effectively convey messages to a wide audience. “Dokdoneun Urittang” or Dokdo is our land is one of the South Korean songs which is not only entertaining but contains a message of nationalism in it. This research is descriptive-qualitative with the semiotic approach of Ferdinand de Saussure. This study aims to explain the representation of nationalism contained in the “Dokdoneun Urittang”. The results of this study indicate that the nationalism seen in the song is nationalism which has general principles of unity, liberty and identity. Keywords: Representation, nationalism, South Korea"

### Keywords
Representation, nationalism, South Korea

## Downloads:
https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/73757/39752

## Published
2021-06-03

## How To Cite
NIKKI VERNISHIA, Ni Putu Anasthasia; 						SUGIARICA JONI, I Dewa Ayu; 						PRADIPTA, Ade Devia.
 Representasi Nasionalisme dalam Lagu Korea Selatan “Dokdoneun Urittang” (Dokdo adalah Tanah Kami) Versi Tahun 2017.
E-Jurnal Medium, [S.l.], v. 1, n. 2, june 2021.
Available at: &lt;https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/73757&gt;. Date accessed: 14 feb. 2024.

## Citation Format Options:
ABNT, APA, BibTeX, CBE, EndNote - EndNote format (Macintosh & Windows), MLA, ProCite - RIS format (Macintosh & Windows), RefWorks, Reference Manager - RIS format (Windows only), Turabian

## Issue
Vol 1 No 2 (2021): Jurnal Ilmu Komunikasi 2021
