---
layout: post
title: "EFEKTIVITAS KAMPANYE #BUDAYABEBERES OLEH KENTUCKY FRIED CHICKEN (KFC) INDONESIA TERHADAP SIKAP KONSUMEN REMAJA DENPASAR"
author: "Lintang Pratama Lian Ramindra, Ni Made Ras Amanda Gelgel, Ade Devia Pradipta"
description: KFC is the most mainstream drivethru eatery in Indonesia where i24 million individuals are keen ion iKFC2019 KFC appealed to the public to dispose of their leftovers 
categories: komunikasi
tags: Campaign, KFC, #budayabeberes
---

## Authors:
Lintang Pratama Lian Ramindra, Ni Made Ras Amanda Gelgel, Ade Devia Pradipta

## Abstract:
"KFC is the most mainstream drive-thru eatery in Indonesia where i24 million individuals are keen ion iKFC.2019, KFC appealed to the public to dispose of their leftovers independently by using the #budayabeberes campaign which they spread through social media as well as at employee outlets. The theory utilized in this research is Dennis Mcquail&#x27;s Stimulus Organism Response theory. This examination is a quantitative research. The discoveries in this investigation the viability of the #budayaberes crusade did by KFC has an impact of i65.9% ion the attitudes of KFC customers in Denpasar, while i24.1% is affected by different factors. The adequacy of the #budayabeberes crusade by Kentucky Fried Chicken (KFC) Indonesia in Denpasar, Bali gives a compelling impact on the perspectives of Denpasar youth buyers. Which expresses that the test worth of the coefficient of assurance is i65.9%, where the worth is remembered for the solid or successful classification. Keywords: Campaign, KFC, #budayabeberes"

### Keywords
Campaign, KFC, #budayabeberes

## Downloads:
https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/76132/40651

## Published
2021-07-26

## How To Cite
RAMINDRA, Lintang Pratama Lian; 						AMANDA GELGEL, Ni Made Ras; 						PRADIPTA, Ade Devia.
 EFEKTIVITAS KAMPANYE #BUDAYABEBERES OLEH KENTUCKY FRIED CHICKEN (KFC) INDONESIA TERHADAP SIKAP KONSUMEN REMAJA DENPASAR.
E-Jurnal Medium, [S.l.], v. 2, n. 1, p. 157-171, july 2021.
Available at: &lt;https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/76132&gt;. Date accessed: 14 feb. 2024.

## Citation Format Options:
ABNT, APA, BibTeX, CBE, EndNote - EndNote format (Macintosh & Windows), MLA, ProCite - RIS format (Macintosh & Windows), RefWorks, Reference Manager - RIS format (Windows only), Turabian

## Issue
Vol 2 No 1 (2021): Jurnal Ilmu Komunikasi Vol 2 No 1 Tahun 2021
