---
layout: post
title: "Personal Branding Fadli Zon Studi pada Akun Twitter  (Akun Twitter Fadli Zon @fadlizon sebagai Calon Legislatif)"
author: "Ni Luh Indah Megayanti, Ni Luh Ramaswati Purnawan, Ni Made Ras Amanda Gelgel"
description: ABSTRACT Personal branding of political actors is a step to shape peoples perception of aspects including personality ability skills to integrity The use of socia
categories: komunikasi
tags: personal branding, the main form of three dimensions of personal branding, tweet, legislative candidate.
---

## Authors:
Ni Luh Indah Megayanti, Ni Luh Ramaswati Purnawan, Ni Made Ras Amanda Gelgel

## Abstract:
"-ABSTRACT- Personal branding of political actors is a step to shape people’s perception of aspects, including personality, ability, skills to integrity. The use of social media by political actors asaa medium of political communication is one of the steps in the formation of personal branding of legislative candidates. This study aims to analyze Fadli Zon’s personal branding as a legislative candidate on @fadlizon personal twitter account during the campaign period of 28th September 2018 – 13rd April 2019. This researchUuses qualitative descriptive research method and analyzed using three main dimensions of personal branding shaper. The result of this study was found 6 tweets without re-tweet found in the period 28th September 2018 – 13rd April 2019. During the campaign, Fadli Zon showed that he was critical, technologically responsive, credible, and populist legislative candidate. Keywords: personal branding, the main form of three dimensions of personal branding, tweet, legislative candidate."

### Keywords
personal branding, the main form of three dimensions of personal branding, tweet, legislative candidate.

## Downloads:
https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/74105/39814

## Published
2021-06-11

## How To Cite
MEGAYANTI, Ni Luh Indah; 						PURNAWAN, Ni Luh Ramaswati; 						AMANDA GELGEL, Ni Made Ras.
 Personal Branding Fadli Zon Studi pada Akun Twitter  (Akun Twitter Fadli Zon @fadlizon sebagai Calon Legislatif).
E-Jurnal Medium, [S.l.], v. 2, n. 1, p. 1-11, june 2021.
Available at: &lt;https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/74105&gt;. Date accessed: 14 feb. 2024.

## Citation Format Options:
ABNT, APA, BibTeX, CBE, EndNote - EndNote format (Macintosh & Windows), MLA, ProCite - RIS format (Macintosh & Windows), RefWorks, Reference Manager - RIS format (Windows only), Turabian

## Issue
Vol 2 No 1 (2021): Jurnal Ilmu Komunikasi Vol 2 No 1 Tahun 2021
