---
layout: post
title: "Strategi Komunikasi Yayasan Tukad Bindu untuk Membangun Awareness sebagai Obyek Ekowisata Perkotaan"
author: "Diandra Annisa Makalam, Ni Luh Ramaswati Purnawan, I Gusti Agung Alit Suryawati"
description: As an urban ecotourism object in Denpasar City Tukad Bindu has a responsibility in spreading awareness to the local residents about the importance of environmental cons
categories: komunikasi
tags: Tukad Bindu Foundation, Awareness, Communication Strategy
---

## Authors:
Diandra Annisa Makalam, Ni Luh Ramaswati Purnawan, I Gusti Agung Alit Suryawati

## Abstract:
"As an urban ecotourism object in Denpasar City, Tukad Bindu has a responsibility in spreading awareness to the local residents about the importance of environmental conservation. This research has a goal to spread the awareness of Tukad Bindu as an urban ecotourism object by composing a communication strategy. This is a descriptive qualitative type of research, using two data collection techniques such as interviews and documentation. The outcome of this study indicate that the Tukad Bindu Foundation seeks to build awareness through informative and educational communication techniques in the form of workshops, community service, etc. In addition, the Tukad Bindu Foundation also utilizes social media in the form of Instagram and Facebook as a channel to deliver the information and education about Tukad Bindu. Keywords: Tukad Bindu Foundation, Awareness, Communication Strategy"

### Keywords
Tukad Bindu Foundation, Awareness, Communication Strategy

## Downloads:
https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/70633/38443

## Published
2021-02-16

## How To Cite
MAKALAM, Diandra Annisa; 						PURNAWAN, Ni Luh Ramaswati; 						ALIT SURYAWATI, I Gusti Agung.
 Strategi Komunikasi Yayasan Tukad Bindu untuk Membangun Awareness sebagai Obyek Ekowisata Perkotaan.
E-Jurnal Medium, [S.l.], v. 1, n. 2, feb. 2021.
Available at: &lt;https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/70633&gt;. Date accessed: 14 feb. 2024.

## Citation Format Options:
ABNT, APA, BibTeX, CBE, EndNote - EndNote format (Macintosh & Windows), MLA, ProCite - RIS format (Macintosh & Windows), RefWorks, Reference Manager - RIS format (Windows only), Turabian

## Issue
Vol 1 No 2 (2021): Jurnal Ilmu Komunikasi 2021
