---
layout: post
title: "Pengaruh Terpaan Media Sosial Twitter Terhadap Kepekaan Sosial Remaja di Kota Denpasar  (Studi Pada utas &amp;ldquo;Twitter Please do Your Magic&amp;rdquo;)"
author: "Nyoman Larashati Putri Utari, Ni Luh Ramaswati Purnawan, Ni Made Ras Amanda Gelgel"
description: In this global era social media has become part of peoplex27s daily lives Twitter as an example Twitterx27s popularity has increased since 2018 and a trend has
categories: komunikasi
tags: Twitter, Social Sensitivity, Social Media Exposure, Uses and Effects
---

## Authors:
Nyoman Larashati Putri Utari, Ni Luh Ramaswati Purnawan, Ni Made Ras Amanda Gelgel

## Abstract:
"In this global era, social media has become part of people&#x27;s daily lives, Twitter as an example. Twitter&#x27;s popularity has increased since 2018, and a trend has emerged for the use of &quot;Twitter, please do your magic”. The purpose of this study is to discover how Twitter as a social media affects the adolescent’s social sensitivity in Denpasar City. This study uses associative quantitative research methods using uses and effects as the theoretical base and involves up to 70 adolescent respondents. The data analyzed using simple linear regression. The result of this research indicate the level of exposure Twitter &quot;Twitter please do your magic&quot; on the adolescent’s social sensitivity in Denpasar City is in the medium range, but it is known to have a positive and significant influence value. Every increase detected in exposure of &quot;Twitter please do your magic&quot;, the adolescent’s social sensitivity in Denpasar City will also increase. Keywords: Twitter, Social Sensitivity, Social Media Exposure, Uses and Effects"

### Keywords
Twitter, Social Sensitivity, Social Media Exposure, Uses and Effects

## Downloads:
https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/77013/40969

## Published
2021-08-18

## How To Cite
PUTRI UTARI, Nyoman Larashati; 						PURNAWAN, Ni Luh Ramaswati; 						AMANDA GELGEL, Ni Made Ras.
 Pengaruh Terpaan Media Sosial Twitter Terhadap Kepekaan Sosial Remaja di Kota Denpasar  (Studi Pada utas “Twitter Please do Your Magic”).
E-Jurnal Medium, [S.l.], v. 2, n. 2, p. 84-93, aug. 2021.
Available at: &lt;https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/77013&gt;. Date accessed: 14 feb. 2024.

## Citation Format Options:
ABNT, APA, BibTeX, CBE, EndNote - EndNote format (Macintosh & Windows), MLA, ProCite - RIS format (Macintosh & Windows), RefWorks, Reference Manager - RIS format (Windows only), Turabian

## Issue
Vol 2 No 2 (2021): Jurnal Ilmu Komunikasi Vol 2 No 2 Tahun 2021
