---
layout: post
title: "HUBUNGAN ANTARA MENONTON IKLAN LINE WEBTOON DI TELEVISI TERHADAP MINAT MEMBACA KOMIK SECARA ONLINE PADA MASYARAKAT KOTA DENPASAR"
author: "Cinthya Nurrahmat Dani Febriyanti, Ade Devia Pradipta, I Gusti Agung Alit Suryawati"
description: From commercials that aired on television Line Webtoon became one of the digital comics that advertise their products with the aim of people watching their ads can down
categories: komunikasi
tags: Line Webtoon Advertisement, Denpasar Citizens, Reading Interests, Digital Comics
---

## Authors:
Cinthya Nurrahmat Dani Febriyanti, Ade Devia Pradipta, I Gusti Agung Alit Suryawati

## Abstract:
"From commercials that aired on television, Line Webtoon became one of the digital comics that advertise their products with the aim of people watching their ads can download online comic apps and increase reading interest in comics. The purpose of this research is to find out the relationship between watching Line Webtoon ads on television to the interest in reading comics online in the people of Denpasar. This research uses a type of associative with quantitative approach. Sampling techniques used are nonprobability sample techniques and purposive sampling methods. Analysis techniques used in research through several stages, namely research instrument test, classical assumption test, Multiple Linear Regression Analysis, Goodness of Fit Test and T Statistical Test and Determination Coefficient. The result of this study is watching Webtoon Line Ads on Television is able to influence the Interest in Reading Comics online in the people of Denpasar. Keywords: Line Webtoon Advertisement, Denpasar Citizens, Reading Interests, Digital Comics"

### Keywords
Line Webtoon Advertisement, Denpasar Citizens, Reading Interests, Digital Comics

## Downloads:
https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/76801/40897

## Published
2021-08-13

## How To Cite
DANI FEBRIYANTI, Cinthya Nurrahmat; 						PRADIPTA, Ade Devia; 						ALIT SURYAWATI, I Gusti Agung.
 HUBUNGAN ANTARA MENONTON IKLAN LINE WEBTOON DI TELEVISI TERHADAP MINAT MEMBACA KOMIK SECARA ONLINE PADA MASYARAKAT KOTA DENPASAR.
E-Jurnal Medium, [S.l.], v. 2, n. 2, p. 60-67, aug. 2021.
Available at: &lt;https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/76801&gt;. Date accessed: 14 feb. 2024.

## Citation Format Options:
ABNT, APA, BibTeX, CBE, EndNote - EndNote format (Macintosh & Windows), MLA, ProCite - RIS format (Macintosh & Windows), RefWorks, Reference Manager - RIS format (Windows only), Turabian

## Issue
Vol 2 No 2 (2021): Jurnal Ilmu Komunikasi Vol 2 No 2 Tahun 2021
