---
layout: post
title: "PEMBENTUKAN PERSONAL BRANDING @jharnabhagwani SEBAGAI BEAUTY INFLUENCER MELALUI TIKTOK"
author: "Farah Isabella Nur Fakih, Ni Luh Ramaswati Purnawan, Ade Devia Pradipta"
description: Personal branding is explained as a communication strategy about a personx27s characteristics that can lead people to sympathize or support them Personal branding ca
categories: komunikasi
tags: personal branding, Jharna Bhagwani, beauty influencer, TikTok
---

## Authors:
Farah Isabella Nur Fakih, Ni Luh Ramaswati Purnawan, Ade Devia Pradipta

## Abstract:
"Personal branding is explained as a communication strategy about a person&#x27;s characteristics that can lead people to sympathize or support them. Personal branding can be found on social media, especially TikTok. Jharna Bhagwani is a young girl of Indian-Indonesian blood who is pouring her hobby into makeup. The results of the makeup content are dominantly containing tips, tricks, point of view (stories/roles), and daily makeup. This study aims to determine the formation of Jharna Bhagwani&#x27;s personal branding as a beauty influencer through TikTok. This research is a descriptive qualitative research on personal branding theory by Montoya, namely the 8 laws of personal branding and semiotic analysis by Peirce. The results of this study that Jharna is a beauty influencer who displays the implied meaning of most of her makeup videos. Her makeup content has also succeeded in bringing her achievements, &quot;Best of Fashion &amp;amp; Beauty&quot; at TikTok Award Indonesia 2020. Keywords: personal branding, Jharna Bhagwani, beauty influencer, TikTok"

### Keywords
personal branding, Jharna Bhagwani, beauty influencer, TikTok

## Downloads:
https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/76480/40803

## Published
2021-08-05

## How To Cite
NUR FAKIH, Farah Isabella; 						PURNAWAN, Ni Luh Ramaswati; 						PRADIPTA, Ade Devia.
 PEMBENTUKAN PERSONAL BRANDING @jharnabhagwani SEBAGAI BEAUTY INFLUENCER MELALUI TIKTOK.
E-Jurnal Medium, [S.l.], v. 2, n. 2, p. 18-29, aug. 2021.
Available at: &lt;https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/76480&gt;. Date accessed: 14 feb. 2024.

## Citation Format Options:
ABNT, APA, BibTeX, CBE, EndNote - EndNote format (Macintosh & Windows), MLA, ProCite - RIS format (Macintosh & Windows), RefWorks, Reference Manager - RIS format (Windows only), Turabian

## Issue
Vol 2 No 2 (2021): Jurnal Ilmu Komunikasi Vol 2 No 2 Tahun 2021
