---
layout: post
title: "Pengaruh Penggunaan #skincareviral di Video TikTok Terhadap Minat Beli Skincare bagi Pengguna TikTok di Denpasar"
author: "Putu Hardayani Utami, Ni Made Ras Amanda, I Gusti Agung Alit Suryawati"
description: ABSTRACT The study explains the effect of using skincareviral on the interest on buying facial serum skincare products on social media that is TikTok TikTok is a socia
categories: komunikasi
tags: Use of hashtag, Interest of Buys, TikTok.
---

## Authors:
Putu Hardayani Utami, Ni Made Ras Amanda, I Gusti Agung Alit Suryawati

## Abstract:
"ABSTRACT The study explains the effect of using #skincareviral on the interest on buying facial serum skincare products on social media that is TikTok. TikTok is a social media that provides a place for its users to express themselves through video content. In today’s digital era, the use of hashtags as a way of marketing communication. Interactive marketing on TikTok has its own potential to become a viral trend. This research is quantitative. The research data collected through a survey method by distributing an online questionnaire as an instrument to 110 respondents with predetermined criteria. The results showed that the variable #skincareviral use on TikTok videos has a strong correlation and positive. This study proves that there is an effect of using #skincareviral in TikTok videos on the interest in buying facial serum skincare products of 89,9%, while the remaining 10,1% is influenced by other factors not mentioned in this research. Kata Kunci: Use of hashtag, Interest of Buys, TikTok."

### Keywords
Use of hashtag, Interest of Buys, TikTok.

## Downloads:
https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/74628/40035

## Published
2021-06-25

## How To Cite
UTAMI, Putu Hardayani; 						RAS AMANDA, Ni Made; 						ALIT SURYAWATI, I Gusti Agung.
 Pengaruh Penggunaan #skincareviral di Video TikTok Terhadap Minat Beli Skincare bagi Pengguna TikTok di Denpasar.
E-Jurnal Medium, [S.l.], v. 2, n. 1, p. 42-49, june 2021.
Available at: &lt;https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/74628&gt;. Date accessed: 14 feb. 2024.

## Citation Format Options:
ABNT, APA, BibTeX, CBE, EndNote - EndNote format (Macintosh & Windows), MLA, ProCite - RIS format (Macintosh & Windows), RefWorks, Reference Manager - RIS format (Windows only), Turabian

## Issue
Vol 2 No 1 (2021): Jurnal Ilmu Komunikasi Vol 2 No 1 Tahun 2021
