---
layout: post
title: "Komunikasi KPU Kota Denpasar Dalam Sosialisasi PILWALI 2020 Di Tengah Pandemi Covid-19"
author: "Ni Luh Manik Cahyaning Dewi, Ni Made Ras Amanda Gelgel, I Gusti Agung Alit Suryawati"
description: This research is entitled quotDenpasar City KPU Communications In Disseminating the 2020 PILWALI Amid the Covid19 Pandemicquot The purpose of this study was to fin
categories: komunikasi
tags: Political Communication, Denpasar City Election Commission, PILWALI Socialization in a Pandemic
---

## Authors:
Ni Luh Manik Cahyaning Dewi, Ni Made Ras Amanda Gelgel, I Gusti Agung Alit Suryawati

## Abstract:
"This research is entitled &quot;Denpasar City KPU Communications In Disseminating the 2020 PILWALI Amid the Covid-19 Pandemic&quot;. The purpose of this study was to find out how political communication was carried out by the Denpasar City KPU in disseminating the election in the midst of the Covid-19 pandemic. This study uses a qualitative descriptive method with Harold Lasswell&#x27;s Political Communication Theory and Schoreder&#x27;s Political Communication Strategy Theory (Offensive Strategy for market expansion and market penetration). Informants in this study amounted to 2 people who were determined by purposive sampling. Data were collected through interviews, observation and documentation. The results showed that the Denpasar City KPU in 2020 only experienced a 2% decrease in public participation from the 2015 election which reached a 5% decline. Keywords: Political Communication, Denpasar City Election Commission, PILWALI Socialization in a Pandemic"

### Keywords
Political Communication, Denpasar City Election Commission, PILWALI Socialization in a Pandemic

## Downloads:
https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/75642/40361

## Published
2021-07-16

## How To Cite
CAHYANING DEWI, Ni Luh Manik; 						AMANDA GELGEL, Ni Made Ras; 						ALIT SURYAWATI, I Gusti Agung.
 Komunikasi KPU Kota Denpasar Dalam Sosialisasi PILWALI 2020 Di Tengah Pandemi Covid-19.
E-Jurnal Medium, [S.l.], v. 2, n. 1, p. 69-77, july 2021.
Available at: &lt;https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/75642&gt;. Date accessed: 14 feb. 2024.

## Citation Format Options:
ABNT, APA, BibTeX, CBE, EndNote - EndNote format (Macintosh & Windows), MLA, ProCite - RIS format (Macintosh & Windows), RefWorks, Reference Manager - RIS format (Windows only), Turabian

## Issue
Vol 2 No 1 (2021): Jurnal Ilmu Komunikasi Vol 2 No 1 Tahun 2021
