---
layout: post
title: "PESAN KEMANUSIAAN DALAM  FILM THE SHAPE OF WATER  (STUDI ANALISIS SEMIOTIK ROLAND BARTHES)"
author: "Marini Fransiska Wijaya, I Dewa Ayu Sugiarica Joni, Ni Made Ras Amanda Gelgel"
description: Film is one of the communication media that has the ability to convey a message and becomes an effective and educative media as a reference for humanity for the communit
categories: komunikasi

---

## Authors:
Marini Fransiska Wijaya, I Dewa Ayu Sugiarica Joni, Ni Made Ras Amanda Gelgel

## Abstract:
"Film is one of the communication media that has the ability to convey a message and becomes an effective and educative media as a reference for humanity for the community. One of the films that raises the message of various important issues in humanity is The Shape of Water. The purpose of this research is to explain the messages of humanity in the film The Shape of Water through a qualitative approach. This research uses the semiotic analysis of Roland Barthes to examine the meaning of denotation, connotation and myth contained in the film. The results of this research show that the human values in the The Shape of Water include messages of helping each other, realizing equality, having a good attitude towards others, establishing intimacy and affection, as well as reminding and advising each other. Keyword: The Message of Humanity, Film, The Shape of Water, Semiotics Roland Barthes"

### Keywords
Keyword Not Available

## Downloads:
https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/75640/40359

## Published
2021-07-16

## How To Cite
WIJAYA, Marini Fransiska; 						SUGIARICA JONI, I Dewa Ayu; 						AMANDA GELGEL, Ni Made Ras.
 PESAN KEMANUSIAAN DALAM  FILM THE SHAPE OF WATER  (STUDI ANALISIS SEMIOTIK ROLAND BARTHES).
E-Jurnal Medium, [S.l.], v. 2, n. 1, p. 49-58, july 2021.
Available at: &lt;https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/75640&gt;. Date accessed: 14 feb. 2024.

## Citation Format Options:
ABNT, APA, BibTeX, CBE, EndNote - EndNote format (Macintosh & Windows), MLA, ProCite - RIS format (Macintosh & Windows), RefWorks, Reference Manager - RIS format (Windows only), Turabian

## Issue
Vol 2 No 1 (2021): Jurnal Ilmu Komunikasi Vol 2 No 1 Tahun 2021
