---
layout: post
title: "Strategi Komunikasi Youtuber Penyandang Tuli Amanda Farliany dalam Mensosialisasikan Bahasa Isyarat Indonesia (BISINDO)"
author: "Sonya Theresia Rajagukguk, Ni Made Ras Amanda Gelgel, I Gusti Agung Alit Suryawati"
description: This research is entitled Amanda Farlianyx27s Deaf Youtuber Communication Strategy in Socializing Indonesian Sign Language BISINDO This study uses a qualitative 
categories: komunikasi
tags: Communication Strategy, BISINDO, Youtube
---

## Authors:
Sonya Theresia Rajagukguk, Ni Made Ras Amanda Gelgel, I Gusti Agung Alit Suryawati

## Abstract:
"This research is entitled “Amanda Farliany&#x27;s Deaf Youtuber Communication Strategy in Socializing Indonesian Sign Language (BISINDO)”. This study uses a qualitative descriptive method with Harold D. Lasswell&#x27;s Communication Strategy Theory. The purpose of this research is to find out how communication strategies conducted by deaf youtuber Amanda Farliany in socializing BISINDO on youtube media.The results showed that the communication strategy according to Lasswell&#x27;s theory on Amanda Farliany&#x27;s youtube is Amanda Farliany as the main communicator and her husband and children as supporting communicators. The message conveyed is in the form of an educational video with several concepts by providing translated text. Supporting media used are Facebook and Instagram. The communicants on Amanda Farliany&#x27;s youtube are all people. The effect obtained is positive feedback from the audience. Keywords: Communication Strategy, BISINDO, Youtube"

### Keywords
Communication Strategy, BISINDO, Youtube

## Downloads:
https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/77088/40993

## Published
2021-08-20

## How To Cite
RAJAGUKGUK, Sonya Theresia; 						AMANDA GELGEL, Ni Made Ras; 						ALIT SURYAWATI, I Gusti Agung.
 Strategi Komunikasi Youtuber Penyandang Tuli Amanda Farliany dalam Mensosialisasikan Bahasa Isyarat Indonesia (BISINDO).
E-Jurnal Medium, [S.l.], v. 2, n. 2, p. 105-112, aug. 2021.
Available at: &lt;https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/77088&gt;. Date accessed: 14 feb. 2024.

## Citation Format Options:
ABNT, APA, BibTeX, CBE, EndNote - EndNote format (Macintosh & Windows), MLA, ProCite - RIS format (Macintosh & Windows), RefWorks, Reference Manager - RIS format (Windows only), Turabian

## Issue
Vol 2 No 2 (2021): Jurnal Ilmu Komunikasi Vol 2 No 2 Tahun 2021
