---
layout: post
title: "REPRESENTASI KECANTIKAN DALAM IKLAN MAKE OVER BEAUTY BEYOND RULES: ART COLLABORATION"
author: "Cynthia Novitasari Dassy, Ni Luh Ramaswati Purnawan, Ade Devia Pradipta"
description: Women and beauty are two things that are interrelated The way each women looks for the meaning of their beauty are different The mass media1 plays the important1 role 
categories: komunikasi
tags: beauty standards, Charles Sanders Peirce, representation of beauty, semiotic theory
---

## Authors:
Cynthia Novitasari Dassy, Ni Luh Ramaswati Purnawan, Ade Devia Pradipta

## Abstract:
"Women and beauty are two things that are interrelated. The way each women looks for the meaning of their beauty are different. The mass media1 plays the important1 role in the process of defining women about beauty. Women’s beauty can support their physical appearance and they have their own way of finding the meaning of beauty according to them. The advertisement of Make Over Beauty Beyond Rules: Art Collaboration present to convey that beauty has no rules or standards that must be fulfilled and women must be dare to express themselves and be confident because beauty has no limits. This study was analyzed1 by using qualitative approach with descriptive research method and using Charles Sanders Peirce’s1 semiotic1 theory. The result of this study showed that beauty has no rules that must be fulfilled and as a woman, you must have the courage to express yourself and know your inner values. Keywords: beauty standards, Charles Sanders Peirce, representation of beauty, semiotic theory"

### Keywords
beauty standards, Charles Sanders Peirce, representation of beauty, semiotic theory

## Downloads:
https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/69498/38075

## Published
2021-01-19

## How To Cite
DASSY, Cynthia Novitasari; 						PURNAWAN, Ni Luh Ramaswati; 						PRADIPTA, Ade Devia.
 REPRESENTASI KECANTIKAN DALAM IKLAN MAKE OVER BEAUTY BEYOND RULES: ART COLLABORATION.
E-Jurnal Medium, [S.l.], v. 1, n. 2, jan. 2021.
Available at: &lt;https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/69498&gt;. Date accessed: 14 feb. 2024.

## Citation Format Options:
ABNT, APA, BibTeX, CBE, EndNote - EndNote format (Macintosh & Windows), MLA, ProCite - RIS format (Macintosh & Windows), RefWorks, Reference Manager - RIS format (Windows only), Turabian

## Issue
Vol 1 No 2 (2021): Jurnal Ilmu Komunikasi 2021
