---
layout: post
title: "Pola Komunikasi Orang Tua dengan Anak dalam Adaptasi Kelas Online di Desa Umejero Kecamatan Busungbiu pada Masa Pandemi Covid-19"
author: "Made Amanda Haresvari, Ni Made Ras Amanda Gelgel, I Dewa Ayu Sugiarica Joni"
description: During the Covid19 pandemic the government implemented Distance Learning or online classes from home throughout Indonesia including in Umejero Village Busungbiu Sin
categories: komunikasi
tags: Communication Pattern, Parents, Children, Distance Learning.
---

## Authors:
Made Amanda Haresvari, Ni Made Ras Amanda Gelgel, I Dewa Ayu Sugiarica Joni

## Abstract:
"During the Covid-19 pandemic, the government implemented Distance Learning or online classes from home throughout Indonesia, including in Umejero Village, Busungbiu, Singaraja. The purpose of this research is to find out how parents and children communicate in the online class adaptation that occurred during the pandemic era in Umejero. This research is descriptive qualitative research that uses theories of communication patterns between parents and children by Yusuf Syamsu, namely permissive communication patterns (liberating), authoritarian communication patterns (authoritarian), and authoritative communication patterns (democratic). Data collection techniques that are used are in-depth interviews with 6 informants consisting of 3 parents and 3 elementary school students in Umejero, documentation and observation. The results are all the theories of communication patterns by Yusuf Syamsu were used in Umejero, one family used permissive patterns, one family used authoritative patterns, and one family used combined permissive and authoritarian patterns. Keywords: Communication Pattern, Parents, Children, Distance Learning."

### Keywords
Communication Pattern, Parents, Children, Distance Learning.

## Downloads:
https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/77385/41155

## Published
2021-08-30

## How To Cite
HARESVARI, Made Amanda; 						AMANDA GELGEL, Ni Made Ras; 						SUGIARICA JONI, I Dewa Ayu.
 Pola Komunikasi Orang Tua dengan Anak dalam Adaptasi Kelas Online di Desa Umejero Kecamatan Busungbiu pada Masa Pandemi Covid-19.
E-Jurnal Medium, [S.l.], v. 2, n. 2, p. 139-147, aug. 2021.
Available at: &lt;https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/77385&gt;. Date accessed: 14 feb. 2024.

## Citation Format Options:
ABNT, APA, BibTeX, CBE, EndNote - EndNote format (Macintosh & Windows), MLA, ProCite - RIS format (Macintosh & Windows), RefWorks, Reference Manager - RIS format (Windows only), Turabian

## Issue
Vol 2 No 2 (2021): Jurnal Ilmu Komunikasi Vol 2 No 2 Tahun 2021
