---
layout: post
title: "STRATEGI MANAJEMEN IMPRESI GIBRAN RAKABUMING DI INSTAGRAM MENJELANG  PEMILIHAN WALI KOTA SOLO TAHUN 2020"
author: "Gusti Ayu Nino Leonita, Ni Luh Ramaswati Purnawan, Ni Made Ras Amanda Gelgel"
description: 2020 is synonymous with the political year one of the regions that holds regional head elections is Solo One of the candidate pairs in the Pilwalkot Solo is Gibran Rak
categories: komunikasi
tags: Content Analysis, Impression Management, Political PR, Instagram
---

## Authors:
Gusti Ayu Nino Leonita, Ni Luh Ramaswati Purnawan, Ni Made Ras Amanda Gelgel

## Abstract:
"2020 is synonymous with the political year, one of the regions that holds regional head elections is Solo. One of the candidate pairs in the Pilwalkot Solo is Gibran Rakabuming who’s promoted by PDIP. Gibran is actively campaigning on Instagram and it&#x27;s considered an impression management practice. Impression management is a self-representation toJURNAL NIN control image when interacting with people. The quantitative descriptive content analysis method with the theory of 5 Impression Management Tactics by Jones and Pittman was used to analyze posts during the campaign period on @gibran_rakabuming Instagram account. Based on the analysis, the tactic most often used is ingratiation with sub indicators expressing sympathy for other parties 28 times and the least amount of tactics is intimidation with sub indicators expressing feelings of anger about something. This illustrates that Gibran only wants to highlight a positive image because it&#x27;s considered to represent an ideal attitude of a leader. Keywords: Content Analysis, Impression Management, Political PR, Instagram"

### Keywords
Content Analysis, Impression Management, Political PR, Instagram

## Downloads:
https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/73762/39756

## Published
2021-06-03

## How To Cite
NINO LEONITA, Gusti Ayu; 						PURNAWAN, Ni Luh Ramaswati; 						AMANDA GELGEL, Ni Made Ras.
 STRATEGI MANAJEMEN IMPRESI GIBRAN RAKABUMING DI INSTAGRAM MENJELANG  PEMILIHAN WALI KOTA SOLO TAHUN 2020.
E-Jurnal Medium, [S.l.], v. 1, n. 2, june 2021.
Available at: &lt;https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/73762&gt;. Date accessed: 14 feb. 2024.

## Citation Format Options:
ABNT, APA, BibTeX, CBE, EndNote - EndNote format (Macintosh & Windows), MLA, ProCite - RIS format (Macintosh & Windows), RefWorks, Reference Manager - RIS format (Windows only), Turabian

## Issue
Vol 1 No 2 (2021): Jurnal Ilmu Komunikasi 2021
