---
layout: post
title: "Analisis Isi Kekerasan Verbal dan Non Verbal dalam Film Kucumbu Tubuh Indahku"
author: "Ni Made Rosalia Dwi Adnyani, Ni Luh Ramaswati Purnawan, Ade Devia Pradipta"
description: ABSTRACT Memories of My Body film is one of the controversial films in Indonesia that is suspected to contain negative content for the younger generation one of which i
categories: komunikasi
tags: Content Analysis, Movies, Verbal Violence, Non Verbal Violence
---

## Authors:
Ni Made Rosalia Dwi Adnyani, Ni Luh Ramaswati Purnawan, Ade Devia Pradipta

## Abstract:
"ABSTRACT Memories of My Body film is one of the controversial films in Indonesia that is suspected to contain negative content for the younger generation, one of which is violence. The purpose off this research is to explain the verbal and non-verbal violence contained in Memories of My Body film used descriptive quantitative content analysis..The results showed thattthe Memories of My Body film featured verbal and non verbal violence 108 times. The most frequent violence is verbal violence 58 times with the most scenes appearing to be yelling as many as 30 times. Non-verbal violence that occurs in the film appears as many as 50 times with the most scenes that appear to be injured with objects or weapons as many as 20 times. In addition, in the Memories of My Body film, the violence looks the most dominant performed by men. Keywords: Content Analysis, Movies, Verbal Violence, Non Verbal Violence"

### Keywords
Content Analysis, Movies, Verbal Violence, Non Verbal Violence

## Downloads:
https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/75955/40563

## Published
2021-07-22

## How To Cite
DWI ADNYANI, Ni Made Rosalia; 						PURNAWAN, Ni Luh Ramaswati; 						PRADIPTA, Ade Devia.
 Analisis Isi Kekerasan Verbal dan Non Verbal dalam Film Kucumbu Tubuh Indahku.
E-Jurnal Medium, [S.l.], v. 2, n. 1, p. 90-98, july 2021.
Available at: &lt;https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/75955&gt;. Date accessed: 14 feb. 2024.

## Citation Format Options:
ABNT, APA, BibTeX, CBE, EndNote - EndNote format (Macintosh & Windows), MLA, ProCite - RIS format (Macintosh & Windows), RefWorks, Reference Manager - RIS format (Windows only), Turabian

## Issue
Vol 2 No 1 (2021): Jurnal Ilmu Komunikasi Vol 2 No 1 Tahun 2021
