---
layout: post
title: "KRITIK SOSIAL DALAM IKLAN SAMPOERNA A MILD VERSI &amp;ldquo;BUKAN MAIN&amp;rdquo; (ANALISIS SEMIOTIKA CHARLES SANDERS PEIRCE)"
author: "Fiqa Annisa, I Gusti Agung Alit Suryawati, Ade Devia Pradipta"
description: Cigarette advertisements are packaged differently because of regulations regarding the broadcasting rules Advertisers are required to be creative in making advertisemen
categories: komunikasi
tags: Advertising, Sampoerna A Mild, Semiotics, Social Criticism, Social Problem
---

## Authors:
Fiqa Annisa, I Gusti Agung Alit Suryawati, Ade Devia Pradipta

## Abstract:
"Cigarette advertisements are packaged differently because of regulations regarding the broadcasting rules. Advertisers are required to be creative in making advertisements so that they do not violate the established regulations, by only displaying brand images without clearly showing their products. The images commonly displayed in cigarette advertisements are lifestyle, passion, and masculinity, but different from the usual version of Sampoerna A Mild advertisement, it was found to raise issues of social reality and criticize mass cultural deviations and social problems. This study uses a qualitative approach with descriptive methods and uses the semiotic theory of Charles Sanders Peirce, to find out the meaning of social criticism in the Sampoerna A Mild advertisement version of Bukan Main. The results of this study indicate that this advertisement criticizes three of the eight social problems that occur in the community, namely violations of norms, crime and also environmental problems. Keywords: Advertising, Sampoerna A Mild, Semiotics, Social Criticism, Social Problem"

### Keywords
Advertising, Sampoerna A Mild, Semiotics, Social Criticism, Social Problem

## Downloads:
https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/77011/40968

## Published
2021-08-18

## How To Cite
ANNISA, Fiqa; 						ALIT SURYAWATI, I Gusti Agung; 						PRADIPTA, Ade Devia.
 KRITIK SOSIAL DALAM IKLAN SAMPOERNA A MILD VERSI “BUKAN MAIN” (ANALISIS SEMIOTIKA CHARLES SANDERS PEIRCE).
E-Jurnal Medium, [S.l.], v. 2, n. 2, p. 75-82, aug. 2021.
Available at: &lt;https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/77011&gt;. Date accessed: 14 feb. 2024.

## Citation Format Options:
ABNT, APA, BibTeX, CBE, EndNote - EndNote format (Macintosh & Windows), MLA, ProCite - RIS format (Macintosh & Windows), RefWorks, Reference Manager - RIS format (Windows only), Turabian

## Issue
Vol 2 No 2 (2021): Jurnal Ilmu Komunikasi Vol 2 No 2 Tahun 2021
