---
layout: post
title: "Makna Pesan Komunikasi Nonverbal Pada Ritual Gua Meze di Kampung Adat Rendu Tutubhada, NTT"
author: "Ni Made Yuni Sugiantari, Ni Luh Ramaswati Purnawan, I Gusti Agung Alit Suryawati"
description: The Gua Meze Ritual is a harvest thanksgiving ritual that is carried out in July according to the local community calendar This ritual has 33 series which are divided i
categories: komunikasi
tags: meaning, communication message, nonverbal, ritual, cave meze, thanksgiving harvest
---

## Authors:
Ni Made Yuni Sugiantari, Ni Luh Ramaswati Purnawan, I Gusti Agung Alit Suryawati

## Abstract:
"The Gua Meze Ritual is a harvest thanksgiving ritual that is carried out in July according to the local community calendar. This ritual has 33 series which are divided into three major stages, namely Preparation, Ritual Celebrations and Restoration. This study examines the nonverbal meanings contained in rituals using the theory of Semiotics by Roland Barthes. Research in Traditional Villages Tutubhada Rendu Tutubhada Village, South Aesesa District, Nagekeo Regency was carried out with the aim of knowing the meaning of nonverbal communication messages in the Gua Meze ritual. This study uses a descriptive qualitative approach. The data source is based on literature review of previous research, observation, interviews, and documentation. The results achieved in this study are an explanation of the meaning of Denotation, Connotation and Myth in the Gua Meze ritual series in the Rendu Tutubhada Traditional Village. Keywords: meaning, communication message, nonverbal, ritual, cave meze, thanksgiving harvest"

### Keywords
meaning, communication message, nonverbal, ritual, cave meze, thanksgiving harvest

## Downloads:
https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/76189/40674

## Published
2021-07-27

## How To Cite
YUNI SUGIANTARI, Ni Made; 						PURNAWAN, Ni Luh Ramaswati; 						ALIT SURYAWATI, I Gusti Agung.
 Makna Pesan Komunikasi Nonverbal Pada Ritual Gua Meze di Kampung Adat Rendu Tutubhada, NTT.
E-Jurnal Medium, [S.l.], v. 2, n. 1, p. 184-191, july 2021.
Available at: &lt;https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/76189&gt;. Date accessed: 14 feb. 2024.

## Citation Format Options:
ABNT, APA, BibTeX, CBE, EndNote - EndNote format (Macintosh & Windows), MLA, ProCite - RIS format (Macintosh & Windows), RefWorks, Reference Manager - RIS format (Windows only), Turabian

## Issue
Vol 2 No 1 (2021): Jurnal Ilmu Komunikasi Vol 2 No 1 Tahun 2021
