---
layout: post
title: "PENGARUH TERPAAN FILM DUA GARIS BIRU TERHADAP SIKAP REMAJA TENTANG                  PERKAWINAN USIA DINI"
author: "Ni Made Sri Pradnya Wati Sudiarta, Ade Devia Pradipta, I Dewa Ayu Sugiarica Joni"
description: 84 of adolescents aged 1217 years in Indonesia have not received sex education Where the lack of information on reproductive health and sexuality is one of the reason
categories: komunikasi
tags: “Dua Garis Biru” Film, Early Marriage, Uses and Effects Theory.
---

## Authors:
Ni Made Sri Pradnya Wati Sudiarta, Ade Devia Pradipta, I Dewa Ayu Sugiarica Joni

## Abstract:
"84% of adolescents aged 12-17 years in Indonesia have not received sex education. Where the lack of information on reproductive health and sexuality is one of the reasons child marriage continues to occur. The “Dua Garis Biru” Film trying to explain the importance of sex education for the young generation. This film has been watched by more than 2.5 million viewers, although since the teaser was released, it became controversial because of the theme considered taboo in Indonesia. The purpose of this study was to explain how the exposure of the “Dua Garis Biru” film affects adolescent attitude about early marriage. This research was conducted using explanatory quantitative research methods with Uses and Effects theory. The data analysis was carried out by simple linear regression analysis. The results of this study indicate that the “Dua Garis Biru” film exposure could affect the adolescent attitude about early marriage. Keywords: “Dua Garis Biru” Film, Early Marriage, Uses and Effects Theory."

### Keywords
“Dua Garis Biru” Film, Early Marriage, Uses and Effects Theory.

## Downloads:
https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/69613/38125

## Published
2021-01-21

## How To Cite
WATI SUDIARTA, Ni Made Sri Pradnya; 						PRADIPTA, Ade Devia; 						SUGIARICA JONI, I Dewa Ayu.
 PENGARUH TERPAAN FILM DUA GARIS BIRU TERHADAP SIKAP REMAJA TENTANG                  PERKAWINAN USIA DINI.
E-Jurnal Medium, [S.l.], v. 1, n. 2, jan. 2021.
Available at: &lt;https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/69613&gt;. Date accessed: 14 feb. 2024.

## Citation Format Options:
ABNT, APA, BibTeX, CBE, EndNote - EndNote format (Macintosh & Windows), MLA, ProCite - RIS format (Macintosh & Windows), RefWorks, Reference Manager - RIS format (Windows only), Turabian

## Issue
Vol 1 No 2 (2021): Jurnal Ilmu Komunikasi 2021
