---
layout: post
title: "MOTIF DAN KEPUASAN PENGGUNA NETFLIX SEBAGAI MEDIA STREAMING DI KALANGAN REMAJA KOTA DENPASAR"
author: "Ni Putu Pradnya Artika Sari, I Gusti Agung Alit Suryawati, Ade Devia Pradipta"
description: Netflix known as entertainment company specializing in streaming service that allows their members to watch TV shows or movies on an internetconnected device without co
categories: komunikasi

---

## Authors:
Ni Putu Pradnya Artika Sari, I Gusti Agung Alit Suryawati, Ade Devia Pradipta

## Abstract:
"Netflix known as entertainment company specializing in streaming service that allows their members to watch TV shows or movies on an internet-connected device without commercials. Netflix can be use on internet-connected devices that offer the Netflix app, such as tablets, smart TV and smartphone. The purpose of this research are to find the motives and the satisfactions of youth in Denpasar by using Netflix as a streaming service. This study using Uses and Gratification Theory by Dennis McQuail. This research uses descriptive quantitative method with purposive sampling technique. Data obtained by distributing questionnaire. The result shows there are two of the four motives that could be satisfied are information motive and integration and social interaction motive. Besides that, motive that has not been able to satisfied are personal identity motive and entertainment motive. Keyword: Motive, Satisfication, Youth, Netflix"

### Keywords
Keyword Not Available

## Downloads:
https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/76800/40896

## Published
2021-08-13

## How To Cite
ARTIKA SARI, Ni Putu Pradnya; 						ALIT SURYAWATI, I Gusti Agung; 						PRADIPTA, Ade Devia.
 MOTIF DAN KEPUASAN PENGGUNA NETFLIX SEBAGAI MEDIA STREAMING DI KALANGAN REMAJA KOTA DENPASAR.
E-Jurnal Medium, [S.l.], v. 2, n. 2, p. 52-59, aug. 2021.
Available at: &lt;https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/76800&gt;. Date accessed: 14 feb. 2024.

## Citation Format Options:
ABNT, APA, BibTeX, CBE, EndNote - EndNote format (Macintosh & Windows), MLA, ProCite - RIS format (Macintosh & Windows), RefWorks, Reference Manager - RIS format (Windows only), Turabian

## Issue
Vol 2 No 2 (2021): Jurnal Ilmu Komunikasi Vol 2 No 2 Tahun 2021
