---
layout: post
title: "KOMODIFIKASI DALAM PROGRAM  TELEVISI INDONESIAN IDOL SEASON 10"
author: "Ni Made Tatik Inggriani, Ni Made Ras Amanda Gelgel, Ade Devia Pradipta"
description: Todayx27s mass media is not only a public space but it can be a form of economic interest that fights in it The development of the media industry often plays a prof
categories: komunikasi
tags: Comodification, Television, Media Economy Politic, Indonesian Idol
---

## Authors:
Ni Made Tatik Inggriani, Ni Made Ras Amanda Gelgel, Ade Devia Pradipta

## Abstract:
"Today&#x27;s mass media is not only a public space, but it can be a form of economic interest that fights in it. The development of the media industry often plays a profit strategy by comodification the form of impressions to gain a rating advantage. Television that is a mass media using public frequencies should be able to be wiser in airing a broadcast. The results of research in the Program Indonesian Idol Season 10 has been constructed in such a way as to conform to market price standards with various forms of commodification ranging from content, audiences, and labour. This research is qualitative research using the semiotic analysis of John Fiske and supported by the economy politic media theory proposed by Vincent Moscow. The overall commodification that occurs can ultimately benefit especially in the broadcast media. Keywords: Comodification, Television, Media Economy Politic, Indonesian Idol"

### Keywords
Comodification, Television, Media Economy Politic, Indonesian Idol

## Downloads:
https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/75964/40570

## Published
2021-07-22

## How To Cite
TATIK INGGRIANI, Ni Made; 						AMANDA GELGEL, Ni Made Ras; 						PRADIPTA, Ade Devia.
 KOMODIFIKASI DALAM PROGRAM  TELEVISI INDONESIAN IDOL SEASON 10.
E-Jurnal Medium, [S.l.], v. 2, n. 1, p. 98-105, july 2021.
Available at: &lt;https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/75964&gt;. Date accessed: 14 feb. 2024.

## Citation Format Options:
ABNT, APA, BibTeX, CBE, EndNote - EndNote format (Macintosh & Windows), MLA, ProCite - RIS format (Macintosh & Windows), RefWorks, Reference Manager - RIS format (Windows only), Turabian

## Issue
Vol 2 No 1 (2021): Jurnal Ilmu Komunikasi Vol 2 No 1 Tahun 2021
