---
layout: post
title: "OBJEKTIVITAS TAYANGAN MATA NAJWA TRANS 7 PASCA PEMILU PRESIDEN DAN WAKIL PRESIDEN 2019"
author: "I Dewa Ayu Diah Budiantari, I Gusti Agung Alit Suryawati, Ade Devia Pradipta"
description: Objectivity is necessary to maintain credibility Some media reports about the presidential election in Indonesia have less than 50 objectivity The media studied in th
categories: komunikasi
tags: Content Analysis, Impressions of the 2019 Presidential Election, Mata Najwa, Objectivity
---

## Authors:
I Dewa Ayu Diah Budiantari, I Gusti Agung Alit Suryawati, Ade Devia Pradipta

## Abstract:
"Objectivity is necessary to maintain credibility. Some media reports about the presidential election in Indonesia have less than 50% objectivity. The media studied in this study was Trans 7, especially the Mata Najwa show, which was the winner of the 2020 KPI Award in the news-talk show category. This study used quantitative content analysis descriptive approach by analyzing the show entitled Usai Pemilu. This study used the theory of the objectivity theory proposed by McQuail in analyzing, includes two indicators (truth and impartiality). The results of the objectivity study of Mata Najwa Trans 7 Post-election meet the items of accuracy, completeness, relevance, and non-evaluative (KPU, Bawaslu, Kubu 01, and the Survey Institute). However for factual, proportional access, two sides, non-evaluative (Kubu 02), and non-sensational items, these impressions are not presented properly. Keywords: Content Analysis, Impressions of the 2019 Presidential Election, Mata Najwa, Objectivity"

### Keywords
Content Analysis, Impressions of the 2019 Presidential Election, Mata Najwa, Objectivity

## Downloads:
https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/74228/39857

## Published
2021-06-15

## How To Cite
DIAH BUDIANTARI, I Dewa Ayu; 						ALIT SURYAWATI, I Gusti Agung; 						PRADIPTA, Ade Devia.
 OBJEKTIVITAS TAYANGAN MATA NAJWA TRANS 7 PASCA PEMILU PRESIDEN DAN WAKIL PRESIDEN 2019.
E-Jurnal Medium, [S.l.], v. 2, n. 1, p. 12-29, june 2021.
Available at: &lt;https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/74228&gt;. Date accessed: 14 feb. 2024.

## Citation Format Options:
ABNT, APA, BibTeX, CBE, EndNote - EndNote format (Macintosh & Windows), MLA, ProCite - RIS format (Macintosh & Windows), RefWorks, Reference Manager - RIS format (Windows only), Turabian

## Issue
Vol 2 No 1 (2021): Jurnal Ilmu Komunikasi Vol 2 No 1 Tahun 2021
