---
layout: post
title: "MEMPERJUANGKAN RUANG NEGOSIASI MELALUI PRODUKSI TEKS"
author: "admin medium, Nyoman Ayu Sukma Pramestisari"
description: The plan to build the Benoa Bay reclamation mega project to support Balix27s tourism industry Ironically the construction of reclamation has become a matter of cont
categories: komunikasi

---

## Authors:
admin medium, Nyoman Ayu Sukma Pramestisari

## Abstract:
"The plan to build the Benoa Bay reclamation mega project to support Bali&#x27;s tourism industry. Ironically, the construction of reclamation has become a matter of controversy in the community because there have been various rejections through the ForBALI alliance. This can be seen from the production of the text of the article on the ForBALI.org page presenting the discourse of conflict between the counter-reclamation community and the government as a policy supporter as an oligarchy. Through the production of this text, periodical discourse is presented as well as reporting each case in detail along with an analysis of the critical dimensions of the counter-discourse community as resource persons, which are important points in attracting the sympathy of text consumers. Moreover, the sources in the text often have strong legitimacy because of their strategic position in society."

### Keywords
Keyword Not Available

## Downloads:
Download Not Available Yet

## Published
2022-07-30

## How To Cite
MEDIUM, admin; 						PRAMESTISARI, Nyoman Ayu Sukma.
 MEMPERJUANGKAN RUANG NEGOSIASI MELALUI PRODUKSI TEKS.
E-Jurnal Medium, [S.l.], v. 3, n. 1, p. 186-193, july 2022.
Available at: &lt;https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/90085&gt;. Date accessed: 14 feb. 2024.

## Citation Format Options:
ABNT, APA, BibTeX, CBE, EndNote - EndNote format (Macintosh & Windows), MLA, ProCite - RIS format (Macintosh & Windows), RefWorks, Reference Manager - RIS format (Windows only), Turabian

## Issue
Vol 3 No 1 (2022): Jurnal Ilmu Komunikasi Vol 3 No 1 Tahun 2022
