---
layout: post
title: "Strategi Komunikasi Pemasaran Terpadu (IMC) EMINA dalam Meningkatkan Brand Awareness pada Remaja di Kota Denpasar"
author: "Ayu Made Bianca Juarez, Ni Made Ras Amanda Gelgel, I Gusti Agung Alit Suryawati"
description: EMINA Cosmetics is a beauty product brand that was established in 2014 The goal of this research is to describe the integrated marketing communication that have been ap
categories: komunikasi

---

## Authors:
Ayu Made Bianca Juarez (Universitas Udayana), Ni Made Ras Amanda Gelgel, I Gusti Agung Alit Suryawati

## Abstract:
"EMINA Cosmetics is a beauty product brand that was established in 2014. The goal of this research is to describe the integrated marketing communication that have been applied by EMINA Cosmetics in order to increase it’s brand awarness to teenage girl in Denpasar City by using qualitative approach accompanied by a descriptive method. Unit of analysis used in this research is integrated marketing communication EMINA Cosmetics in Denpasar City. The technique of determining informants is by purposive sampling technique and the selected informants are promoters and beauty advisor. Data obtained through observation, interviews and documentation. The result of this research is EMINA Cosmetics in Denpasar City’s IMC are by using a combination of several types of promotions.EMINA Cosmetics in increasing brand awareness uses the concept of a marketing mix, as well promotional mix. The type of promotion that is most powerful from other areas is interactive marketing and sales promotion."

### Keywords
Keyword Not Available

## Downloads:
Download Not Available Yet

## Published
2022-07-29

## How To Cite
JUAREZ, Ayu Made Bianca; 						GELGEL, Ni Made Ras Amanda; 						SURYAWATI, I Gusti Agung Alit.
 Strategi Komunikasi Pemasaran Terpadu (IMC) EMINA dalam Meningkatkan Brand Awareness pada Remaja di Kota Denpasar.
E-Jurnal Medium, [S.l.], v. 3, n. 1, p. 169-173, july 2022.
Available at: &lt;https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/86722&gt;. Date accessed: 14 feb. 2024.

## Citation Format Options:
ABNT, APA, BibTeX, CBE, EndNote - EndNote format (Macintosh & Windows), MLA, ProCite - RIS format (Macintosh & Windows), RefWorks, Reference Manager - RIS format (Windows only), Turabian

## Issue
Vol 3 No 1 (2022): Jurnal Ilmu Komunikasi Vol 3 No 1 Tahun 2022
