---
layout: post
title: "Hubungan Terpaan Film &amp;ldquo;A Man Called Ahok&amp;rdquo; Dengan Citra Basuki Tjahaja Purnama (Ahok) Dalam Masyarakat"
author: "Hernanda Kartika, Ni Made Ras Amanda Gelgel, I Dewa Ayu Sugiarica Joni"
description: ABSTRACT quotA Man Called Ahokquot is a national biopic film that in its release this film raises opinions of many people related to its emergence of the political 
categories: komunikasi
tags: Biopic, Film Exposure, Image, Media Dependency
---

## Authors:
Hernanda Kartika, Ni Made Ras Amanda Gelgel, I Dewa Ayu Sugiarica Joni

## Abstract:
"ABSTRACT &quot;A Man Called Ahok&quot; is a national biopic film that in its release, this film raises opinions of many people related to its emergence of the political contestation season and of Ahok’s controversial figure. Ahok is assumed to have a mission to win the sympathy of the people, with a narrative of Ahok&#x27;s life values ??during Bangka Belitung. The purpose of this study is to explain the relationship between exposure of the film &quot;A Man Called Ahok&quot; with the image of Basuki Tjahaja Purnama (Ahok) in society. The study uses explanation quantitative research methods with the theory of media exposure, image, and media dependencies. The results indicate that there is a relationship between the exposure of the film &quot;A Man Called Ahok&quot; with the image of Basuki Tjahaja Purnama (Ahok) in the community. Keywords : Biopic, Film Exposure, Image, Media Dependency"

### Keywords
Biopic, Film Exposure, Image, Media Dependency

## Downloads:
https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/62904/35980

## Published
2022-01-26

## How To Cite
KARTIKA, Hernanda; 						AMANDA GELGEL, Ni Made Ras; 						SUGIARICA JONI, I Dewa Ayu.
 Hubungan Terpaan Film “A Man Called Ahok” Dengan Citra Basuki Tjahaja Purnama (Ahok) Dalam Masyarakat.
E-Jurnal Medium, [S.l.], v. 1, n. 2, p. 15-24, jan. 2022.
Available at: &lt;https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/62904&gt;. Date accessed: 14 feb. 2024.

## Citation Format Options:
ABNT, APA, BibTeX, CBE, EndNote - EndNote format (Macintosh & Windows), MLA, ProCite - RIS format (Macintosh & Windows), RefWorks, Reference Manager - RIS format (Windows only), Turabian

## Issue
Vol 1 No 2 (2021): Jurnal Ilmu Komunikasi 2021
