---
layout: post
title: "Pengaruh Terpaan Line Webtoon Killstagram Terhadap Kecemasan Menggunakan Hashtag di Instagram Pada Remaja Kota Denpasar"
author: "Ni Made Candra Ari Peratiwi, I Gusti Agung Alit Suryawati, Ade Devia Pradipta"
description: One of the famous Line Webtoon titles in the horror genre is Line Webtoon Killstgaram quotSeries Murder Through Hashtagquot Line Webtoon Killstagram quotSeries Mu
categories: komunikasi
tags: Line Webtoon, Line Webtoon Killstagram, Anxiety, Instagram
---

## Authors:
Ni Made Candra Ari Peratiwi (Universitas Udayana), I Gusti Agung Alit Suryawati, Ade Devia Pradipta

## Abstract:
"One of the famous Line Webtoon titles in the horror genre is Line Webtoon Killstgaram &quot;Series Murder Through Hashtag&quot;. Line Webtoon Killstagram &quot;Series Murder Through Hashtag&quot; tells about the terror of murder because of the use of hashtags on his Instagram social media.Anxiety is defined as a feeling of restlessness, worry and fear. The purpose of this study was to explain how the influence of KIllstagram&#x27;s Line Webtoon exposure to anxiety using hashtags on Instagram in teenagers in Denpasar City. This research uses explanative quantitative research method with uses and effects theory. This study also involved 210 teenagers in Denpasar City, aged 14 – 24 years. The results of this study indicate that Line Webtoon Killstagram exposure has a positive and significant effect on anxiety using hashtags on Instagram in Denpasar City teenagers. When Line Webtoon Killstagram&#x27;s exposure increases, the anxiety of using hashtags on Instagram will also increase. Keywords: Line Webtoon, Line Webtoon Killstagram, Anxiety, Instagram"

### Keywords
Line Webtoon, Line Webtoon Killstagram, Anxiety, Instagram

## Downloads:
Download Not Available Yet

## Published
2022-07-29

## How To Cite
PERATIWI, Ni Made Candra Ari; 						SURYAWATI, I Gusti Agung Alit; 						PRADIPTA, Ade Devia.
 Pengaruh Terpaan Line Webtoon Killstagram Terhadap Kecemasan Menggunakan Hashtag di Instagram Pada Remaja Kota Denpasar.
E-Jurnal Medium, [S.l.], v. 3, n. 1, p. 153-159, july 2022.
Available at: &lt;https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/86635&gt;. Date accessed: 14 feb. 2024.

## Citation Format Options:
ABNT, APA, BibTeX, CBE, EndNote - EndNote format (Macintosh & Windows), MLA, ProCite - RIS format (Macintosh & Windows), RefWorks, Reference Manager - RIS format (Windows only), Turabian

## Issue
Vol 3 No 1 (2022): Jurnal Ilmu Komunikasi Vol 3 No 1 Tahun 2022
