---
layout: post
title: "Personal Branding Selebtwit Takdir Ridwan (@jek___) di Media Sosial Twitter"
author: "Unzila Yuniar Sukma, Ni Made Ras Amanda Gelgel, I Gusti Agung Alit Suryawati"
description: Twitter is a very popular platform that can be used to build personal branding as it is interactive and spreads by word of mouth Takdir Ridwan or mostknown by Jek je
categories: komunikasi
tags: Personal Branding, Personal Branding Pyramid, Twitter Celebrity
---

## Authors:
Unzila Yuniar Sukma (Universitas Udayana), Ni Made Ras Amanda Gelgel, I Gusti Agung Alit Suryawati

## Abstract:
"Twitter is a very popular platform that can be used to build personal branding as it is interactive and spreads by word of mouth. Takdir Ridwan or most-known by Jek (@jek___) is one of the Twitter celebrity who actively uses Twitter to facilitate two-way communication with his followers by bringing his own characteristics. This study uses a qualitative descriptive approach that aims to explain the personal branding strategies used by Jek through his tweets on Twitter by using Freddy Rangkuti&#x27;s main concept named Personal Branding Pyramid. This study shows that Jek has his own personal branding as humorous priest and has 5 uniqueness. Also, this study shows that Jek already fulfill the four stages of the Personal Branding Pyramid. Keywords: Personal Branding, Personal Branding Pyramid, Twitter Celebrity"

### Keywords
Personal Branding, Personal Branding Pyramid, Twitter Celebrity

## Downloads:
Download Not Available Yet

## Published
2022-07-29

## How To Cite
SUKMA, Unzila Yuniar; 						GELGEL, Ni Made Ras Amanda; 						SURYAWATI, I Gusti Agung Alit.
 Personal Branding Selebtwit Takdir Ridwan (@jek___) di Media Sosial Twitter.
E-Jurnal Medium, [S.l.], v. 3, n. 1, p. 160-168, july 2022.
Available at: &lt;https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/86639&gt;. Date accessed: 14 feb. 2024.

## Citation Format Options:
ABNT, APA, BibTeX, CBE, EndNote - EndNote format (Macintosh & Windows), MLA, ProCite - RIS format (Macintosh & Windows), RefWorks, Reference Manager - RIS format (Windows only), Turabian

## Issue
Vol 3 No 1 (2022): Jurnal Ilmu Komunikasi Vol 3 No 1 Tahun 2022
