---
layout: post
title: "MOTIF PENGGUNA TIKTOK DALAM MENDAPATKAN FOR YOUR PAGE (FYP) PADA KALANGAN REMAJA KOTA DENPASAR"
author: "Faris izzan Putra Rahma Gita, Ni Made Ras Amanda Gelgel, I Gusti Agung Alit Suryawati"
description: TikTok is an application that provides a place for users to be creative in creating content in the form of videos The way the TikTok for your page algorithm works is ba
categories: komunikasi
tags: Motive, TikTok Video, For Your Page, Teenager
---

## Authors:
Faris izzan Putra Rahma Gita (Universitas Udayana), Ni Made Ras Amanda Gelgel, I Gusti Agung Alit Suryawati

## Abstract:
"TikTok is an application that provides a place for users to be creative in creating content in the form of videos. The way the TikTok for your page algorithm works is based on user interaction, video information, and account settings. The purpose of this study was to find out the motives of TikTok users in getting for your page (fyp) among teenagers in Denpasar City. The data in this quantitative descriptive study were collected using a questionnaire and analyzed using descriptive statistical analysis techniques. the results of the study show that the motive that most encourages teenagers in Denpasar to upload TikTok videos using the hashtag for your page (fyp) is the motive to fill spare time, while The motive that does not encourage teenagers in the city of Denpasar to upload TikTok videos using the hashtag for your page (fyp) is the economic motive. Keywords: Motive, TikTok Video, For Your Page, Teenager"

### Keywords
Motive, TikTok Video, For Your Page, Teenager

## Downloads:
https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/86413/45668

## Published
2022-07-29

## How To Cite
PUTRA RAHMA GITA, Faris izzan; 						GELGEL, Ni Made Ras Amanda; 						SURYAWATI, I Gusti Agung Alit.
 MOTIF PENGGUNA TIKTOK DALAM MENDAPATKAN FOR YOUR PAGE (FYP) PADA KALANGAN REMAJA KOTA DENPASAR.
E-Jurnal Medium, [S.l.], v. 3, n. 1, p. 103-102, july 2022.
Available at: &lt;https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/86413&gt;. Date accessed: 14 feb. 2024.

## Citation Format Options:
ABNT, APA, BibTeX, CBE, EndNote - EndNote format (Macintosh & Windows), MLA, ProCite - RIS format (Macintosh & Windows), RefWorks, Reference Manager - RIS format (Windows only), Turabian

## Issue
Vol 3 No 1 (2022): Jurnal Ilmu Komunikasi Vol 3 No 1 Tahun 2022
