---
layout: post
title: "PENGARUH TERPAAN BERITA EFEK VAKSIN COVID-19 DI INSTAGRAM @DETIKCOM TERHADAP PERSEPSI REMAJA DI KOTA DENPASAR TENTANG VAKSIN COVID-19"
author: "Ngakan Putu Teja Kamertaya, Ni Luh Ramaswati Purnawan, Ni Made Ras Amanda Gelgel"
description: Instagram account detikcom consistently uploads news about the effects of the COVID19 vaccine which always attracts the attention of netizens on Instagram The exposur
categories: komunikasi
tags: News Exposure of the COVID-19 Vaccine Effect, Instagram @detikcom, Teenagers Perception
---

## Authors:
Ngakan Putu Teja Kamertaya (Universitas Udayana), Ni Luh Ramaswati Purnawan, Ni Made Ras Amanda Gelgel

## Abstract:
"Instagram account @detikcom consistently uploads news about the effects of the COVID-19 vaccine which always attracts the attention of netizens on Instagram. The exposure to the news about theside effects of the COVID-19 vaccine then gave rise to various perceptions for the public about the COVID-19 vaccine. The purpose of this study is to explain the influence of news of the effects of the COVID-19 vaccine on Instagram @detikcom. The sample of this study was 210 using non-probability sampling technique, namely purposive sampling. Data collection through questionnaires.The analysise technique used is simple linear regression. News of the effect of the COVID-19 vaccine on Instagram @detikcom has a positive and significant impact on the perception of teenagers in Denpasar City. When the news of the effect of the COVID-19 vaccine on Instagram @detikcom increases, the perception of teenagers in Denpasar City will also increase. Keywords : News Exposure of the COVID-19 Vaccine Effect, Instagram @detikcom, Teenagers Perception"

### Keywords
News Exposure of the COVID-19 Vaccine Effect, Instagram @detikcom, Teenagers Perception

## Downloads:
https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/86355/45675

## Published
2022-07-29

## How To Cite
TEJA KAMERTAYA, Ngakan Putu; 						PURNAWAN, Ni Luh Ramaswati; 						GELGEL, Ni Made Ras Amanda.
 PENGARUH TERPAAN BERITA EFEK VAKSIN COVID-19 DI INSTAGRAM @DETIKCOM TERHADAP PERSEPSI REMAJA DI KOTA DENPASAR TENTANG VAKSIN COVID-19.
E-Jurnal Medium, [S.l.], v. 3, n. 1, p. 94-102, july 2022.
Available at: &lt;https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/86355&gt;. Date accessed: 14 feb. 2024.

## Citation Format Options:
ABNT, APA, BibTeX, CBE, EndNote - EndNote format (Macintosh & Windows), MLA, ProCite - RIS format (Macintosh & Windows), RefWorks, Reference Manager - RIS format (Windows only), Turabian

## Issue
Vol 3 No 1 (2022): Jurnal Ilmu Komunikasi Vol 3 No 1 Tahun 2022
