---
layout: post
title: "MOTIF DAN KEPUASAN REMAJA DENPASAR MENONTON KONTEN VIDEO @haipuja MELALUI INSTAGRAM"
author: "Ni Luh Santia Dewi, Ni Made Ras Amanda Gelgel, I Gusti Agung Alit Suryawati"
description: Instagram is a social networkbased platform that is used to share content in the form of photos or videos Video content is a content or information on a media in the f
categories: komunikasi
tags: Motives, Satisfaction, Teen, Instagram
---

## Authors:
Ni Luh Santia Dewi (Universitas Udayana), Ni Made Ras Amanda Gelgel, I Gusti Agung Alit Suryawati

## Abstract:
"Instagram is a social network-based platform that is used to share content in the form of photos or videos. Video content is a content or information on a media in the form of moving images containing text or audio arranged in digital form. In consuming media, media users are based on a certain motive. This study aims to find out what the underlying motives for Denpasar teenagers are to watch @haipuja&#x27;s video content via Instagram and how satisfaction is obtained by Denpasar teenagers from watching @haipuja&#x27;s video content via Instagram. The research location was chosen in Denpasar City because the number of internet users is the highest in Bali Province with the research subjects being Denpasar teenagers aged 13-24 years. The theory used in this study is the Uses and Gratification theory using the concept of motives from Denis McQuail which consists of information motives, personal identity motives, integration and social interaction motives, and entertainment motives. The research method used is descriptive quantitative type. Data were collected by distributing questionnaires using a Likert scale. The results showed that the satisfied motives were information motives, personal identity motives, and entertainment motives, while the unsatisfied motives were integration and social interaction motives. So, it can be concluded that Denpasar teen watch @haipuja&#x27;s video content to seek information, find out the latest issues, get to know themselves, look for interesting trends, seek entertainment and improve the mood, while related to moral messages and teachings of kindness and sensitivity to the surrounding environment, it is not very easy to find by a Denpasar teenager in @haipuja&#x27;s video content. Keywords: Motives, Satisfaction, Teen, Instagram"

### Keywords
Motives, Satisfaction, Teen, Instagram

## Downloads:
https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/86317/45667

## Published
2022-07-29

## How To Cite
DEWI, Ni Luh Santia; 						GELGEL, Ni Made Ras Amanda; 						SURYAWATI, I Gusti Agung Alit.
 MOTIF DAN KEPUASAN REMAJA DENPASAR MENONTON KONTEN VIDEO @haipuja MELALUI INSTAGRAM.
E-Jurnal Medium, [S.l.], v. 3, n. 1, p. 87-93, july 2022.
Available at: &lt;https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/86317&gt;. Date accessed: 14 feb. 2024.

## Citation Format Options:
ABNT, APA, BibTeX, CBE, EndNote - EndNote format (Macintosh & Windows), MLA, ProCite - RIS format (Macintosh & Windows), RefWorks, Reference Manager - RIS format (Windows only), Turabian

## Issue
Vol 3 No 1 (2022): Jurnal Ilmu Komunikasi Vol 3 No 1 Tahun 2022
