---
layout: post
title: "Penetrasi Sosial dalam Virtual Blind Date"
author: "Fransiska Olivia Rum, I Dewa Ayu Sugiarica Joni, Ade Devia Pradipta"
description: The development of technology and the limitations of physical activity during the Covid19 pandemic have forced everyone to find ways to stay connected with family frie
categories: komunikasi

---

## Authors:
Fransiska Olivia Rum (Universitas Udayana), I Dewa Ayu Sugiarica Joni, Ade Devia Pradipta

## Abstract:
"The development of technology and the limitations of physical activity during the Covid-19 pandemic have forced everyone to find ways to stay connected with family, friends, and romantic relationships. In early 2021, there is a virtual blind date which is an opportunity for those who are looking for friends and affection during the pandemic. Virtual blind date is an activity organized by a community where every dating couple will be met in an online meeting application which has been divided into breakout rooms. Each individual will get 3-4 times a pair and each last 15-20 minutes. This study aims to explain the stages of developing a virtual blind date dating couple relationship in a limited duration. This study uses qualitative research methods using social penetration theory and CMC. The results of the study managed to collect 6 informants with an age range of 18-25 years. All of the informants went through the orientation stage and the affective exchange stage, but not all the informants and each partner went through the affective exchange stage and the stable exchange stage. In the virtual blind date, the stable exchange stage is characterized by social media exchanges between dating partners to provide opportunities for continuing deeper conversations. Each informant has a different level of depth and topic of conversation with each partner. In conversations through CMC, some of the informants and their partners felt they could be more open because they did not know each other&#x27;s backgrounds and there was visual anonymity, thereby reducing the possibility of obtaining justification."

### Keywords
Keyword Not Available

## Downloads:
Download Not Available Yet

## Published
2022-07-29

## How To Cite
RUM, Fransiska Olivia; 						JONI, I Dewa Ayu Sugiarica; 						PRADIPTA, Ade Devia.
 Penetrasi Sosial dalam Virtual Blind Date.
E-Jurnal Medium, [S.l.], v. 3, n. 1, p. 62-70, july 2022.
Available at: &lt;https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/86263&gt;. Date accessed: 14 feb. 2024.

## Citation Format Options:
ABNT, APA, BibTeX, CBE, EndNote - EndNote format (Macintosh & Windows), MLA, ProCite - RIS format (Macintosh & Windows), RefWorks, Reference Manager - RIS format (Windows only), Turabian

## Issue
Vol 3 No 1 (2022): Jurnal Ilmu Komunikasi Vol 3 No 1 Tahun 2022
