---
layout: post
title: "KAMPANYE &quot;INGAT PESAN IBU: 3M&quot; TERHADAP KEPATUHAN MENJALANI PROTOKOL KESEHATAN COVID-19"
author: "Made Ayu Sunilaningrat Dharmayani, Ni Luh Ramaswati Purnawan, Ade Devia Pradipta"
description: Adaptasi Kebiasaan Baru AKB or new normal era is a preventive policy released by government in order to save the national economy which is getting weaker due to the 
categories: komunikasi

---

## Authors:
Made Ayu Sunilaningrat Dharmayani (Universitas Udayana), Ni Luh Ramaswati Purnawan, Ade Devia Pradipta

## Abstract:
"“Adaptasi Kebiasaan Baru (AKB)” or new normal era is a preventive policy released by government in order to save the national economy which is getting weaker due to the pandemic and to save the increasing number of confirmed positive Covid-19 patients. Therefore the government become more vigorous in carrying out health protocols, one of it is through the “Ingat Pesan Ibu: 3M” campaign on television. Through this research, esearcher want to find out the impact of “Ingat Pesan Ibu: 3M” campaign on compliance with the Covid-19 health protocol. This research used a method named qualitative with case study approach. Unit of analysis focused on people. Non-probability sampling technique also used to determine the informants. The results showed the “Ingat Pesan Ibu: 3M” campaign on television had an impact in the form of community compliance in carrying out the 3M movements (wearing masks, washing hands and maintaining distance)."

### Keywords
Keyword Not Available

## Downloads:
https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/89312/47838

## Published
2023-01-10

## How To Cite
DHARMAYANI, Made Ayu Sunilaningrat; 						PURNAWAN, Ni Luh Ramaswati; 						PRADIPTA, Ade Devia.
 KAMPANYE &quot;INGAT PESAN IBU: 3M&quot; TERHADAP KEPATUHAN MENJALANI PROTOKOL KESEHATAN COVID-19.
E-Jurnal Medium, [S.l.], v. 3, n. 2, p. 182-189, jan. 2023.
Available at: &lt;https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/89312&gt;. Date accessed: 14 feb. 2024.

## Citation Format Options:
ABNT, APA, BibTeX, CBE, EndNote - EndNote format (Macintosh & Windows), MLA, ProCite - RIS format (Macintosh & Windows), RefWorks, Reference Manager - RIS format (Windows only), Turabian

## Issue
Vol 3 No 2 (2022): Jurnal Ilmu Komunikasi Vol 3 No 2 Tahun 2022
