---
layout: post
title: "Analisis Perbandingan Efektivitas Iklan Shopee Di Televisi dan Youtube Pada Masyarakat Kota Denpasar"
author: "Miranda Elfanita Sihono, Ni Made Ras Amanda Gelgel, Ni Luh Ramaswati Purnawan"
description: Advertising can be an effective marketing medium to reach the target market Effective advertising is the kind of advertising that gets the attention of the right target
categories: komunikasi

---

## Authors:
Miranda Elfanita Sihono (Universitas Udayana), Ni Made Ras Amanda Gelgel (Universitas Udayana), Ni Luh Ramaswati Purnawan (Universitas Udayana)

## Abstract:
"Advertising can be an effective marketing medium to reach the target market. Effective advertising is the kind of advertising that gets the attention of the right target markets to get people to makes purchases or use a product. Shopee became the largest eCommerce brand to spend on television advertising during the January-September 2019 periods. In the meantime, Shopee also uses Youtube as media to advertise. This study aims to compare Shopee advertisements on Television and Youtube in Denpasar City. Non-probability sampling with a purposive sampling method is the sampling techniques that is used in this study. The data in this study were obtained by distributing questionnaires whose results were measured using a Likert scale. This research uses the arithmetic mean analysis technique and T-Test test. The results showed there is differences in effectiveness and stated that Shopee advertisements on Youtube were more effective than Shopee advertisements on television in Denpasar City."

### Keywords
Keyword Not Available

## Downloads:
https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/91509/46243

## Published
2023-07-21

## How To Cite
SIHONO, Miranda Elfanita; 						RAS AMANDA GELGEL, Ni Made; 						RAMASWATI PURNAWAN, Ni Luh.
 Analisis Perbandingan Efektivitas Iklan Shopee Di Televisi dan Youtube Pada Masyarakat Kota Denpasar.
E-Jurnal Medium, [S.l.], v. 4, n. 1, p. 73-78, july 2023.
Available at: &lt;https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/91509&gt;. Date accessed: 14 feb. 2024.

## Citation Format Options:
ABNT, APA, BibTeX, CBE, EndNote - EndNote format (Macintosh & Windows), MLA, ProCite - RIS format (Macintosh & Windows), RefWorks, Reference Manager - RIS format (Windows only), Turabian

## Issue
Vol 4 No 1 (2023): Jurnal Ilmu Komunikasi Vol 4 No 2 Tahun 2022
