---
layout: post
title: "PENGARUH TERPAAN VIDEO TIKTOK @CERITAMODISFASHION DALAM MENINGKATKAN BRAND AWARENESS MODIS FASHION STORE PADA REMAJA KOTA DENPASAR"
author: "Bulan Melania, I Gusti Agung Alit Suryawati, I Dewa Ayu Sugiarica Joni, Calvin Damasemil"
description: One of the womenx27s clothing outlets that uses the TikTok application as a marketing medium is Modis Fashion Store as evidenced by the TikTok account Ceritamodisfa
categories: komunikasi
tags: Brand Awareness, Modis Fashion Store
---

## Authors:
Bulan Melania (Universitas Udayana), I Gusti Agung Alit Suryawati, I Dewa Ayu Sugiarica Joni, Calvin Damasemil

## Abstract:
"One of the women&#x27;s clothing outlets that uses the TikTok application as a marketing medium is Modis Fashion Store, as evidenced by the TikTok account @Ceritamodisfashion which now has 2.1 million followers on the TikTok application. This study aims to determine the effect of Tik Tok @Ceritamodisfashion content in increasing Modis Fashion Store Brand Awareness among teenagers in the city of Denpasar. The results found in this study are 76.7% of the Fashion Store&#x27;s Fashion Store Brand Awareness in teenagers in Denpasar, which is influenced by exposure to the video content of TikTok @Ceritamodisfashion. The remaining 23.3% is influenced by other variables outside of this study. However it has positive and significant . Keywords: Brand Awareness, Modis Fashion Store"

### Keywords
Brand Awareness, Modis Fashion Store

## Downloads:
https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/89189/50690

## Published
2023-07-21

## How To Cite
MELANIA, Bulan et al.
 PENGARUH TERPAAN VIDEO TIKTOK @CERITAMODISFASHION DALAM MENINGKATKAN BRAND AWARENESS MODIS FASHION STORE PADA REMAJA KOTA DENPASAR.
E-Jurnal Medium, [S.l.], v. 4, n. 1, p. 25-33, july 2023.
Available at: &lt;https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/89189&gt;. Date accessed: 14 feb. 2024.

## Citation Format Options:
ABNT, APA, BibTeX, CBE, EndNote - EndNote format (Macintosh & Windows), MLA, ProCite - RIS format (Macintosh & Windows), RefWorks, Reference Manager - RIS format (Windows only), Turabian

## Issue
Vol 4 No 1 (2023): Jurnal Ilmu Komunikasi Vol 4 No 2 Tahun 2022
