---
layout: post
title: "PENGARUH TERPAAN IKLAN SHOPEE FOOD TERHADAP MINAT BELI REMAJA DI DENPASAR"
author: "Dimas Eza Prayoga, Ni Made Ras Amanda Gelgel, I Gusti Agung Alit Suryawati"
description: Advertising becomes important for companies where advertising can produce work that will later become a high income Creative advertising is an advertisement that is ori
categories: komunikasi
tags: Ad Exposure, Shopee Food, Buying Interest
---

## Authors:
Dimas Eza Prayoga (Universitas Udayana), Ni Made Ras Amanda Gelgel, I Gusti Agung Alit Suryawati

## Abstract:
"Advertising becomes important for companies where advertising can produce work that will later become a high income. Creative advertising is an advertisement that is ori and there is no element of similarity with other advertisements, advertisements that we did not expect, advertisements that we did not expect, advertisements that have meaning or meaning, and advertisements that can affect our emotional level (Swastha, 2000). This research explains how the influence of Shopee Food advertising on the buying interest of teenagers in Denpasar. This research uses explanatory quantitative methods. The number of samples in this study was 72 respondents. The respondents in this study were teenagers in Denpasar city with an age range of 18 to 23 years. Researchers used a simple linear regression statistical test to prove and analyze the data. Data analysis using SPSS Statistical 24 program. The results showed a variable relationship between Shopee Food advertising exposure and teenagers&#x27; buying interest in Denpasar. With a coefficient of determination (R Square) of 0.537. These results show that the influence of Shopee Food advertising on the buying interest of teenagers in Denpasar is 53.7%. Keywords: Ad Exposure, Shopee Food, Buying Interest"

### Keywords
Ad Exposure, Shopee Food, Buying Interest

## Downloads:
https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/97909/50695

## Published
2023-07-21

## How To Cite
PRAYOGA, Dimas Eza; 						GELGEL, Ni Made Ras Amanda; 						SURYAWATI, I Gusti Agung Alit.
 PENGARUH TERPAAN IKLAN SHOPEE FOOD TERHADAP MINAT BELI REMAJA DI DENPASAR.
E-Jurnal Medium, [S.l.], v. 4, n. 1, p. 110-116, july 2023.
Available at: &lt;https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/97909&gt;. Date accessed: 14 feb. 2024.

## Citation Format Options:
ABNT, APA, BibTeX, CBE, EndNote - EndNote format (Macintosh & Windows), MLA, ProCite - RIS format (Macintosh & Windows), RefWorks, Reference Manager - RIS format (Windows only), Turabian

## Issue
Vol 4 No 1 (2023): Jurnal Ilmu Komunikasi Vol 4 No 2 Tahun 2022
