---
layout: post
title: "Wacana Tanding Stereotype Gender Dalam Iklan Heineken – Cheers To All (Analisis Semiotika Roland Barthes)"
author: "Samuel Oktaberian Manurung, I Dewa Ayu Sugiarica Joni, Ade Devia Pradipta, Calvin Damasemil"
description: An understanding of gender often creates pros and cons in society coupled with the existence of stereotypes attached to each gender makes issues about gender are more 
categories: komunikasi

---

## Authors:
Samuel Oktaberian Manurung (Universitas Udayana), I Dewa Ayu Sugiarica Joni, Ade Devia Pradipta, Calvin Damasemil

## Abstract:
"An understanding of gender often creates pros and cons in society, coupled with the existence of stereotypes attached to each gender, makes issues about gender are more interesting to discuss. One of them is a campaign ad released by the Heineken company entitled Cheers To All in 2020 on their YouTube page. The purpose of this research is to explain the Discourse of Countering Gender Stereotypes in Heineken-Cheers To All Advertisements. To achieve this goal, this research uses qualitative methods and constructivism paradigms with semiotic analysis proposed by Roland Barthes by looking at the value of denotation, connotation and myth. As a result of this study, Heineken tries to fight against gender stereotypes that have been attached to food and beverages, especially in beers and cocktails which are depicted through scenes that try to show that Heineken is openly against the existing stereotypes and has been stuck in society."

### Keywords
Keyword Not Available

## Downloads:
https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/87106/47809

## Published
2023-01-10

## How To Cite
MANURUNG, Samuel Oktaberian et al.
 Wacana Tanding Stereotype Gender Dalam Iklan Heineken – Cheers To All (Analisis Semiotika Roland Barthes).
E-Jurnal Medium, [S.l.], v. 3, n. 2, p. 26-33, jan. 2023.
Available at: &lt;https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/87106&gt;. Date accessed: 14 feb. 2024.

## Citation Format Options:
ABNT, APA, BibTeX, CBE, EndNote - EndNote format (Macintosh & Windows), MLA, ProCite - RIS format (Macintosh & Windows), RefWorks, Reference Manager - RIS format (Windows only), Turabian

## Issue
Vol 3 No 2 (2022): Jurnal Ilmu Komunikasi Vol 3 No 2 Tahun 2022
