---
layout: post
title: "Representasi Citra Ibu Dalam Lirik Lagu Bertaut Karya Nadin Amizah"
author: "adik deviristyana budi, I Gusti Agung Alit Suryawati, I Dewa Ayu Sugiarica Joni"
description: Representation is a sign or form of meaning contained in a message Music is a medium that can be used to give messages to many people Through music a wide audience or
categories: komunikasi
tags: Mother&#x27;s image, Nadin Amizah, Bertaut Song Lyrics, Representation
---

## Authors:
adik deviristyana budi (Universitas Udayana), I Gusti Agung Alit Suryawati, I Dewa Ayu Sugiarica Joni

## Abstract:
"Representation is a sign or form of meaning contained in a message. Music is a medium that can be used to give messages to many people. Through music, a wide audience or the general public can be influenced by the messages the music creator wants to convey. Like the message about the image of a mother contained in the song Linked by Nadin Amizah, the song describes the image of a mother. The purpose of this study was to determine the representation of the image of a mother listed in the song Bertaut. This study uses a qualitative approach and uses the theory of Ferdinand De Saussure. The results obtained after doing this research are Bertaut by Nadin Amizah describes various forms of images of a mother such as the love of a mother given to her child. Keywords: Mother&#x27;s image, Nadin Amizah, Bertaut Song Lyrics, Representation"

### Keywords
Mother&#x27;s image, Nadin Amizah, Bertaut Song Lyrics, Representation

## Downloads:
https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/86902/47804

## Published
2023-01-10

## How To Cite
BUDI, adik deviristyana; 						SURYAWATI, I Gusti Agung Alit; 						JONI, I Dewa Ayu Sugiarica.
 Representasi Citra Ibu Dalam Lirik Lagu Bertaut Karya Nadin Amizah.
E-Jurnal Medium, [S.l.], v. 3, n. 2, p. 1-7, jan. 2023.
Available at: &lt;https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/86902&gt;. Date accessed: 14 feb. 2024.

## Citation Format Options:
ABNT, APA, BibTeX, CBE, EndNote - EndNote format (Macintosh & Windows), MLA, ProCite - RIS format (Macintosh & Windows), RefWorks, Reference Manager - RIS format (Windows only), Turabian

## Issue
Vol 3 No 2 (2022): Jurnal Ilmu Komunikasi Vol 3 No 2 Tahun 2022
