---
layout: post
title: "REPRESENTASI PELANGGARAN HAK ASASI MANUSIA DALAM FILM &amp;ldquo;DE OOST/THE EAST&amp;rdquo; (Analisis Semiotik Charles Sanders Peirce)"
author: "Olgheri Paco Syah Rabani, I Gusti Agung Alit Suryawati, I Dewa Ayu Sugiarica Joni, Calvin Damasemil"
description: As one of the mass communication media film acts as a medium for delivering messages to audiences through audio and visual De OostThe East is a film that depicts vi
categories: komunikasi
tags: Human Rights Violations, Film, De Oost/The East, Charles S. Peirce.
---

## Authors:
Olgheri Paco Syah Rabani (Udayana University), I Gusti Agung Alit Suryawati, I Dewa Ayu Sugiarica Joni, Calvin Damasemil

## Abstract:
"As one of the mass communication media, film acts as a medium for delivering messages to audiences through audio and visual. “De Oost/The East” is a film that depicts violence during the Indonesian war of independence. This study aims to see the representation of human rights violations in the film &quot;De Oost/The East&quot;. The researcher uses a qualitative approach and examines data with the concept of human rights issues and human rights violations, Hall&#x27;s Representation Theory and Peirce&#x27;s Triangle of Meaning Theory. The results showed that the film &quot;De Oost/The East&quot; represented gross human rights violations in the form of: (1) Torture, (2) Murder, (3) Extermination. Various forms of human rights violations in the film in accordance with the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court Article 7 is a form of gross human rights violations, namely crimes against humanity. Keywords: Human Rights Violations, Film, De Oost/The East, Charles S. Peirce."

### Keywords
Human Rights Violations, Film, De Oost/The East, Charles S. Peirce.

## Downloads:
https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/89273/50692

## Published
2023-07-21

## How To Cite
RABANI, Olgheri Paco Syah et al.
 REPRESENTASI PELANGGARAN HAK ASASI MANUSIA DALAM FILM “DE OOST/THE EAST” (Analisis Semiotik Charles Sanders Peirce).
E-Jurnal Medium, [S.l.], v. 4, n. 1, p. 34-43, july 2023.
Available at: &lt;https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/89273&gt;. Date accessed: 14 feb. 2024.

## Citation Format Options:
ABNT, APA, BibTeX, CBE, EndNote - EndNote format (Macintosh & Windows), MLA, ProCite - RIS format (Macintosh & Windows), RefWorks, Reference Manager - RIS format (Windows only), Turabian

## Issue
Vol 4 No 1 (2023): Jurnal Ilmu Komunikasi Vol 4 No 2 Tahun 2022
