---
layout: post
title: "Pemanfaatan Tren Tagar Welcome to Indonesia Pada TikTok Sebagai Sarana Kritik Sosial Generasi Y dan Z"
author: "Ni Kadek Mawar Ariestuti, Ni Luh Ramaswati Purnawan, Ade Devia Pradipta"
description: The use of hashtags on social media was initially used to classify content or conversation topics to make them easier to find But now hashtags functioned as a signsys
categories: komunikasi
tags: #welcometoindonesia, critical discourse analysis, social criticism, TikTok
---

## Authors:
Ni Kadek Mawar Ariestuti (Udayana University), Ni Luh Ramaswati Purnawan (Udayana University), Ade Devia Pradipta (Udayana University)

## Abstract:
"The use of hashtags on social media was initially used to classify content or conversation topics to make them easier to find. But now, hashtags functioned as a sign-system to respond to a phenomenon or social issue that is currently happening. Tiktok is exploring its popularity as the most popular social media platform for generation Y and Z today. Hashtags on TikTok can be used to voice the latest hot issues and trends. One of them is #welcometoindonesia, which experienced a trend from late June to early July 2021. This study uses the new media theory of Pierre Levy and the critical discourse analysis method of Teun A. Van Dijk. Through the #welcometoindonesia trend, generations Y and Z try to criticize the attitudes and habits of the majority people who dominate in social life. The dynamic conditions of social, cultural and political life can be displayed through a simple lyrics and content packaging. Keywords: #welcometoindonesia, critical discourse analysis, social criticism, TikTok"

### Keywords
#welcometoindonesia, critical discourse analysis, social criticism, TikTok

## Downloads:
https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/89291/47834

## Published
2023-01-10

## How To Cite
ARIESTUTI, Ni Kadek Mawar; 						PURNAWAN, Ni Luh Ramaswati; 						PRADIPTA, Ade Devia.
 Pemanfaatan Tren Tagar Welcome to Indonesia Pada TikTok Sebagai Sarana Kritik Sosial Generasi Y dan Z.
E-Jurnal Medium, [S.l.], v. 3, n. 2, p. 168-181, jan. 2023.
Available at: &lt;https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/89291&gt;. Date accessed: 14 feb. 2024.

## Citation Format Options:
ABNT, APA, BibTeX, CBE, EndNote - EndNote format (Macintosh & Windows), MLA, ProCite - RIS format (Macintosh & Windows), RefWorks, Reference Manager - RIS format (Windows only), Turabian

## Issue
Vol 3 No 2 (2022): Jurnal Ilmu Komunikasi Vol 3 No 2 Tahun 2022
