---
layout: post
title: "HUBUNGAN TINGKAT KEPERCAYAAN MASYARAKAT PADA CITIZEN JOURNALISM TERHADAP TINGKAT KONSUMSI BERITA DI MEDIA MAINSTREAM"
author: "Vynski Valeria, Ni Made Ras Amanda Gelgel, I Dewa Ayu Sugiarica Joni, Calvin Damasemil"
description: This study explains how the relationship between the level of public trust in citizen journalism and the level of news consumption in mainstream media where journalists 
categories: komunikasi
tags: Trust level, Citizen Journalism, News consumption rate, Mainstream Media.
---

## Authors:
Vynski Valeria (Universitas Udayana), Ni Made Ras Amanda Gelgel, I Dewa Ayu Sugiarica Joni, Calvin Damasemil

## Abstract:
"This study explains how the relationship between the level of public trust in citizen journalism and the level of news consumption in mainstream media where journalists in mainstream media have professional ethics, namely the journalistic code of ethics. This study uses an explanative quantitative method.The number of samples in this study were 70 respondents. The respondents in this study were the people of Denpasar city with an age range of 18 to 25 years. In proving and analyzing the data, the researcher used a simple linear regression statistical test. The results showed that there was a relationship between the level of trust and the level of news consumption. These results indicate that the relationship between the level of public trust in citizen journalism and the level of news consumption in mainstream media is 34.2%. Keywords : Trust level, Citizen Journalism, News consumption rate, Mainstream Media."

### Keywords
Trust level, Citizen Journalism, News consumption rate, Mainstream Media.

## Downloads:
https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/88716/47826

## Published
2023-01-10

## How To Cite
VALERIA, Vynski et al.
 HUBUNGAN TINGKAT KEPERCAYAAN MASYARAKAT PADA CITIZEN JOURNALISM TERHADAP TINGKAT KONSUMSI BERITA DI MEDIA MAINSTREAM.
E-Jurnal Medium, [S.l.], v. 3, n. 2, p. 95-105, jan. 2023.
Available at: &lt;https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/88716&gt;. Date accessed: 14 feb. 2024.

## Citation Format Options:
ABNT, APA, BibTeX, CBE, EndNote - EndNote format (Macintosh & Windows), MLA, ProCite - RIS format (Macintosh & Windows), RefWorks, Reference Manager - RIS format (Windows only), Turabian

## Issue
Vol 3 No 2 (2022): Jurnal Ilmu Komunikasi Vol 3 No 2 Tahun 2022
