---
layout: post
title: "Strategi Komunikasi Pemasaran Terpadu Orlenalycious dalam Meningkatkan Brand Awareness Sebagai Cake Brownies Premium Pada Masyarakat di Kota Denpasar"
author: "Putri Cening Wulandari, Ni Luh Ramaswati Purnawan, Ni Made Ras Amanda Gelgel"
description: Orlenalycious is a brand that was established in 2018 Orlenalycious focuses on cake brownie products Business competition in the culinary field is a challenge for Orle
categories: komunikasi
tags: Brand Awareness, Integrated Marketing Communication, Marketing Mix, Orlenalycious.
---

## Authors:
Putri Cening Wulandari (Ilmu Komunikasi FISIP Udayana), Ni Luh Ramaswati Purnawan, Ni Made Ras Amanda Gelgel

## Abstract:
"Orlenalycious is a brand that was established in 2018. Orlenalycious focuses on cake brownie products. Business competition in the culinary field is a challenge for Orlenalycious to maintain its existence. So, implementing the right marketing communication strategy is very necessary. The purpose of this study is to explain the integrated marketing communication strategy used by Orlenalycious to increase Brand Awareness. Using descriptive qualitative research methods and determining informants with purposive sampling techniques. Data obtained through interviews and documentation. The results of this study show that the strategy used by Orlenalycious uses two concepts, namely the marketing mix consisting of 7P product, place, price, promotion, people, process, physical evidence and IMC elements which consist of 8 elements, namely Advertising, Sales Promotion, Interactive Marketing, Direct Marketing, Personal Selling, Public Relations, Events, Word of Mouth. Marketing communication strategies have important influence on increasing Brand Awareness for Orlenalycious, namely interactive marketing and advertising. Keywords: Brand Awareness, Integrated Marketing Communication, Marketing Mix, Orlenalycious."

### Keywords
Brand Awareness, Integrated Marketing Communication, Marketing Mix, Orlenalycious.

## Downloads:
https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/103847/50518

## Published
2024-01-18

## How To Cite
WULANDARI, Putri Cening; 						PURNAWAN, Ni Luh Ramaswati; 						GELGEL, Ni Made Ras Amanda.
 Strategi Komunikasi Pemasaran Terpadu Orlenalycious dalam Meningkatkan Brand Awareness Sebagai Cake Brownies Premium Pada Masyarakat di Kota Denpasar.
E-Jurnal Medium, [S.l.], v. 4, n. 2, p. 136-145, jan. 2024.
Available at: &lt;https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/103847&gt;. Date accessed: 14 feb. 2024.

## Citation Format Options:
ABNT, APA, BibTeX, CBE, EndNote - EndNote format (Macintosh & Windows), MLA, ProCite - RIS format (Macintosh & Windows), RefWorks, Reference Manager - RIS format (Windows only), Turabian

## Issue
Vol 4 No 2 (2023): Jurnal Ilmu Komunikasi Vol 4 No 2 Tahun 2023
