---
layout: post
title: "PERSEPSI MAHASISWA UNIVERSITAS UDAYANA TERHADAP GAYA KOMUNIKASI MAUDY AYUNDA SEBAGAI JURU BICARA DALAM SIARAN PERS PRESIDENSI G20"
author: "Putu Sinta Kharisma Devi, Ni Luh Ramaswati Purnawan, Ni Made Ras Amanda Gelgel"
description: The selection of public figures as an icon of public information delivery important role for the effectiveness of communication This was also done by Indonesia Governme
categories: komunikasi

---

## Authors:
Putu Sinta Kharisma Devi (Ilmu Komunikasi), Ni Luh Ramaswati Purnawan, Ni Made Ras Amanda Gelgel

## Abstract:
"The selection of public figures as an icon of public information delivery important role for the effectiveness of communication. This was also done by Indonesia Government by appointing Maudy Ayunda as Indonesia&#x27;s spokesperson in the G20 Presidency. In order to ensure information conveyed properly, an approach using the right communication style is needed. This research was conducted to explain how Udayana University Students perceive Maudy Ayunda&#x27;s communication style as a spokesperson in the G20 Presidency Press Release. The method used in this study is descriptive quantitative by using S-O-R (Stimus-Organism-Respons) Theory. The sampling technique used is non-probability which focuses on purposive sampling with data collection techniques using questionnaires. Based on the results of research on 130 respondents, the average score of respondents&#x27; answers was 4.26, which means that Udayana University students have a very positive perception of the communication style used by Maudy Ayunda in the G20 Presidency Press Release."

### Keywords
Keyword Not Available

## Downloads:
https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/103169/50336

## Published
2024-01-18

## How To Cite
DEVI, Putu Sinta Kharisma; 						PURNAWAN, Ni Luh Ramaswati; 						GELGEL, Ni Made Ras Amanda.
 PERSEPSI MAHASISWA UNIVERSITAS UDAYANA TERHADAP GAYA KOMUNIKASI MAUDY AYUNDA SEBAGAI JURU BICARA DALAM SIARAN PERS PRESIDENSI G20.
E-Jurnal Medium, [S.l.], v. 4, n. 2, p. 87-99, jan. 2024.
Available at: &lt;https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/komunikasi/article/view/103169&gt;. Date accessed: 14 feb. 2024.

## Citation Format Options:
ABNT, APA, BibTeX, CBE, EndNote - EndNote format (Macintosh & Windows), MLA, ProCite - RIS format (Macintosh & Windows), RefWorks, Reference Manager - RIS format (Windows only), Turabian

## Issue
Vol 4 No 2 (2023): Jurnal Ilmu Komunikasi Vol 4 No 2 Tahun 2023
